Pragmatic Dharma

  DISCLAIMER.

  Some of the information you find here can be considered personal.
  This used to be public but is now published under pseudonym.  I've
  edited it to remove all identifying information and maybe fix some
  typos, but the contents should be intact.  Note that a lot of this I
  no longer agree with.  Read it as a snapshot in time.


This log is about my experience with insight meditation (IM) and other
things it drags into this life.  Weirdness ahead.


                              * * *


Meditation is a strongly subjective activity, which makes it hard to
talk about.  Moreover, kicking "concept" itself off the throne is one
of the core elements of IM, which leaves one with not much to talk
about.

Good bye :)


So what's the point? Why meditate?

It reduces mental anguish by eliminating some "endless loops".

The bottom line seems to be that sustained focus on the process of
attention and direct perception sets in motion a certain change in the
way attention and perception work.  It seems shuffle things around
into a more harmonious configuration.

Relentlessly paying attention to things you normally don't pay
attention to will make you notice things that are normally unnoticed.
Some of these "insights" can change your idea of "self" in quite
radical ways, making it all feel a bit more natural and integrated.

The main mechanism behind this seems to be sustained, repetetive
exposure to direct experience of physical sensations.  Once you see
something clearly, over and over again, as it presents itself, it
looses its disturbing power.  Staring will not make "bad" sensations
go away.  It merely opens the door for them to be integrated in the
whole of experience.

Paraphrasing Daniel Ingram, once "your shit" loosens its stranglehold,
it's a lot easier to deal with!





                              * * *


It all started end of November 2011 with this HN post [3] which
referred the Hamilton Project[6] website and lead me to Daniel
Ingram's videos[4], book "Mastering the Core Teachings of the Buddha"
[1], and Dharma Overground[5] website.

Daniel's "minimal dogma" approach spoke to me in a very direct way.
My background is in science and engineering and I can very much
appreciate cutting to the essence without too much story.

( EDIT: 2012-11-24, one year after starting meditation.. )
In that period I was plagued by a lot of anxiety.  In this state
Daniel's videos[4] pushed me over the edge to give it a try, and the
continued progress has kept me on the cushon ever since.

In case you wonder, I am not religious.  It's a big irony to me that
"dharma" means "truth".

After about 3 months into doing daily IM practice I can say that it is
definitely worth the effort.  It gave me what I was looking for, which
was basically a better handle on stress and anxiety.  Beyond that it
is interesting to say the least.  More like a revelation, really.

In this log I try to follow Daniel's advice and will attempt not to go
(too much) into my "stuff".  There's plenty of it though and I will
just label it as such.

I will also attempt to keep the logging of experiences separate from
their interpretation, which isn't always possible either.  Suggestion
and wishful thinking are always lurking.


[1] http://www.interactivebuddha.com/mctb.shtml
[2] http://delicious.com/doelie/meditation
[3] http://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=3263767
[4] http://vimeo.com/23539030
[5] http://dharmaoverground.org
[6] http://thehamiltonproject.blogspot.com/


Entry: My practice
Date: Fri Nov 25 19:19:13 EST 2011

I've been using a mish-mash of techniques in my own practice.

I experimented with formal meditation somewhere around 2000, to pick
it up again after getting hit by a personal crisis early 2008.  I
started from Pema Chodron's book "The Places That Scare You"[1],
focusing mostly on being present.  I've been practicing on and off
since then, quite irregularly.  Mostly informal, but switching to
formal sitting meditation to try to regain center after being swept
away by overwhelming emotions.

This summer and fall (2011) I lived through another crisis and started
reading Pema Chodron again, and finding more material on the internet
until I ran into Daniel Ingram's book[2] early this week, which I'm
reading now.

My method of meditation after 2008 up to now followed mostly Pema
Chodron's instructions.  Focus on the outbreath.  Label thinking as
"thinking".  When drifting off, be kind to yourself ("thinking,
buddy!") but persistent in bringing back focus to the object.

Experience emotions that arise, but don't cling to them.  Stare the
emotion in the eye, but don't feed it with a story line.  Drop the
story line.  Learn to identify the story line.  Focus on the
experience.

From reading a bit of Daniel's book, what I've been doing seems to be
mostly insight meditation: experiencing reality as it presents itself,
in it's purest form through sensations, not through abstractions
(thoughts caused by sensations).

[1] http://www.shambhala.com/html/catalog/items/isbn/978-1-57062-921-1.cfm
[2] http://www.interactivebuddha.com/mctb.shtml
[3] http://dharmaoverground.org/web/guest/dharma-wiki/-/wiki/Main/The+Three+Characteristics/pop_up?p_r_p_185834411_title=The+Three+Characteristics


Entry: Dark Night Yogi
Date: Fri Nov 25 19:31:12 EST 2011

[stuff]

After watching the Daniel Ingram's video[1][2][3] I start to wonder
whether I'm what he calls a "Dark Night Yogi"[4].

I recall having some strange experiences the first times I performed
formal meditation, probably in the summer of 2000.  However, I had
more intense "personality changing" experiences somewhere around
September 2004.  I was calling myself elightened, though now I refer
to it as my first manic episode.  It lasted a couple of months.  By
new year's eve that year I think I was out of it.  There where a
couple of relapses but they where minor in comparison.  I don't think
I was formally meditating after this experience.

I also turned into quite a grump after that, experiencing a lot of
trouble not dealing well with challenges coming my way.  I recall
getting into math again in 2005 and experiencing some weird insights.
The mathematical insights themselves where not that remarkable --
mostly gaining deeper understanding about some mathematical structures
and algorithms used in digital signal processing.  However, the way
they presented themselves to me and their seemingly huge significance
was, well, unusual..  Where I would use real-world analogies to
understand these structures during my engineering studies, I started
to "see" them more directly.

Free-flow mathematical thinking still gets me in what I call a
manic-like state.  I don't have it so much with real, earth-bound
problems though, like anything that has to do with (payed) work.  Not
enough space to float aimlessly maybe.  Too much directed thinking
instead of following intuition?

[1] http://vimeo.com/23539030
[2] http://vimeo.com/23567498
[3] http://vimeo.com/23568408
[4] http://dharmaoverground.org/web/guest/dharma-wiki/-/wiki/Main/Dark%20night%20yogi/pop_up?p_r_p_185834411_title=Dark%20night%20yogi


Entry: Restarting practice
Date: Fri Nov 25 20:17:13 EST 2011

I'm trying to find a good place and time to practice.  I'm making a
lot of excuses lately.  Quite mindlessly attached to that web browser.

Apart from just "taking a minute" sitting in front of my terminal I
don't get very far.  This room is not very conducive, with the whining
computer and the snoring dog.


Entry: Alan Chapman - Becoming a seeker
Date: Sun Nov 27 01:28:50 EST 2011

(paraphrased from the interview here [1])

When you get to a point in your life where you cannot find the
fulfillment you are looking for, where it would be possible before
like relationships, career, ... you become a seeker.

Enlightenment is a process.  Perpetually waking up.  Getting into a
groove of waking up.  It's an activity.

[1] http://www.openbuddha.com/2011/10/09/Alan-Chapman-Talk-in-Berkeley/



Entry: The Three Trainings
Date: Tue Nov 29 10:53:01 EST 2011

According to Daniel it is important to distinguish the 3 trainings
(chapter 7 in [1]); one of the cases where knowing a bit of theory is
essential to not get into a cul-de-sac.

1. Morality

Real world.  Being kind to yourself and other people.  Content of
thoughts is important, as opposed to concentration & wisdom where
content is only distraction.

2. Concentration

Pure focus on object without deconstruction into individual
sensations.  Leads to blissful states.

3. Wisdom / Insight

Focus with observation of true nature, of individual sensations that
make up experience.  The goal is insight into the nature of reality,
of the three characteristics: impermanence, suffering, no-self.


[1] http://www.interactivebuddha.com/mctb.shtml


Entry: Waking up, reassembling
Date: Wed Nov 30 01:16:38 EST 2011

Explain the experience of waking up with self dissolved, panicking and
re-assembling.

Since a couple of years I have this experience waking up.  Last years
it's been there almost every morning.  This experience is one of
disorientation.  Feeling disassembled in some way.  Having raw
experience, and some feeling, sometimes anxiety, that is sitting there
as a remnant of something that might have been important.  It takes
about 5-15 seconds for this to pass, but it is sometimes very
prominent.  I've experienced it as unpleasant mostly, though after
picking up meditation again the fear of it seems to have vanished in
at least one occasion.  Not this morning as I woke up in a bit of a
panic due to a phone call so I did not observe the pattern itself.


Entry: Noon practice, 20 minutes.
Date: Wed Nov 30 13:58:31 EST 2011

Wandering, worrying, anxiety, "oh-no"-ness, frustration, contempt.
That's how I remember.  I had a couple of laughs at the impossibility
to stick to the breath.  Some small moments here and there it worked,
mostly I went off into wandering.  I did not reach a calm state as
I've had in almost all sitting meditations of the last days (3).

I noted with:

- wandering
- thinking
- feeling
- fear
- worry
- hearing
- seeing
- pain


The overall feeling that seemed to stick in the background was one of
"this is not working" and my stuff calling me to attention/worry.

The rest of the day was quite turbulent mentally.  No calm as I had in
the past days.  Switching between quite severe anxiety and pretty
blissful happyness while doing dayjob.



Entry: Headache flashes
Date: Wed Nov 30 14:04:01 EST 2011

Fairly consistently I'm getting flashes of headache in the top, back
of my head, on two sides simultaneously, and a sensation that goes
from top top to top back.  This happens almost every time I go from
jittery/wandering to a calmer concentration state.  I've been
experiencing these headache flashes ever since I started meditation
after discovering Pema Chodron's books.



Entry: Anxiety
Date: Wed Nov 30 14:07:22 EST 2011

Because of the nature of my work (computer programming) I have no
mental space to actually experience wandering thoughts for the large
part of the time.  However, I do often experience "background anxiety"
which is a not-so-cognitive version of the state triggered by my
stuff.  These feelings go away completely in concentration states.
The flashes of thoughts that usually trigger them do arise, but the
reaction is not there or way less severe than in the "background
anxiety" experience.

Doing noting practice I have a very hard time to look beyond this
anxiety when it's there.  I can clearly know it's there, but I seem to
be caught up in it, I don't see it as a sensation, i.e. it's got some
kind of special status.



Entry: More anxiety
Date: Thu Dec  1 12:28:27 EST 2011

This morning I had it bad again.  I feel better now after 20-30
minutes meditation in the bath tub.  Used noting and the last 10
minutes or so I used counting (1-60, I got at 45 or so) to stay closer
to the breath.  At a point where I was counting a bit automatically, I
decided to count backwards, just as I do with the dog when he's
pulling on the leech.  The experience of that and the confrontation
with suffering it triggered made me laugh :)

I seem to have reached some small stretches of say 30 seconds where
the observation of the breath seems to have been pure.  It was
different.  No chatter, just the breath's sensations.  I can't really
perceive or less note the stream of discrete vibrations that's
described in Daniel's writing, but at least I can see the space in
which they occur.  It seems like new territory at least.  I'm not sure
what phase it is though.  Can't yet bring my experience to the naming
of phases of the first path.

I do feel a lot of suffering and pain and misery, which can get quite
intense, then passes away.  I loose focus during the arising of this
suffering and often go off into content.


Entry: 30 mins
Date: Sat Dec  3 21:47:26 EST 2011

Trying to make sense of the experiences.  First half was as before.  I
get to a concentration state where it's possible to see mental
activity as phenomena, without getting lost in their content.  This is
then interspersed with some content wandering from time to time.

After 15-20 minutes I had an experience of breaking open.  Calm, glow.
Definitely a "state", so maybe one of the concentration states?  No
content wandering.



Entry: Focus
Date: Mon Dec  5 14:36:39 EST 2011

Yesterday's practice was uneventful.  Nearing the end I was glad it
was done.  In the middle I had a dip of the jitters and I managed to
sit through that, letting it pass away.  At the end of 40 minutes
though I just had to stop.

Can't really focus well.  Maybe meditate?  Try that?  Go against the
stream, observe jitterniness.  Had 15 minutes at noon.



Entry: Evening meditation
Date: Tue Dec  6 23:24:42 EST 2011

This morning about 15-20 minutes in the bath tub.  Don't remember much
of it.  Maybe should write down next time.

Just finished evening meditation, a little over 30 minutes.  Two
significant things.  1. Glow in palms of my hands and soles of my feet
and forehead.  They felt like balls the size of the palm of a hand.
2. Some feeling of something coming up, then a glow, flash, rotating
stuff.  It pushed my position backward automatically.  I fell out of
it after I started observing the impermanence/unsatisfactoriness
characteristics.  Not really a trace of self.

That's experience.  Now where does that put me?  Are these
concentration states or insight stages?



Entry: Noticing neurotic stuff
Date: Thu Dec  8 10:20:17 EST 2011

As described in Pema's books I am getting more neurotic during the day
after 10 days of daily meditation of at least 30 minutes.

More procrastination, more anger and agitation.  The anger episodes
are becoming more apparent, and in some sense more absurd and
experienced as a waste of time and effort.  I am noticing them,
sometimes when they occur but almost definitely after having expressed
anger in any way.

The procrastination (doing the fun work/play instead of the hard,
confrontational and boring work that I really have to do) is still
quite strongly present, and still takes me on a ride for whole or half
days.


Entry: Yesterday's practice
Date: Thu Dec  8 10:24:23 EST 2011

I was very tired.  The night before I had only 5 hours of sleep.
Almost fell asleep after 20 minutes while sitting.  I felt a strong
desire to stop but investigated tiredness, lack of concentration and
desire for sleep or laying down.  I was watching the clock to hit my
30 minute mark, and when it did I felt a calm coming over me which I
proceeded to investigate instead of holding on to it.  I observed it
passing away and arising again.  Going to bed I continued to meditate,
observe that state which lasted.  I probably was hanging on to it,
then noticed I had faded out into pre-sleep wander and went to sleep.


Entry: Today's practice
Date: Thu Dec  8 22:41:45 EST 2011

Evening meditation was uneventful.  Hard time concentrating.  Wandered
off many times.  Quit after 33 minutes, with the intention to do 43.
I broke off my noon meditation in the bath tub as well.
Uncontrollable wandering, no patience to bring it back.  In the
evening meditation I was able to bring up the patience a couple of
times.  Noticed frustration and the wandering.  Noticed through
experience that I can't wander and focus at the same time.  That
sounds obvious cognitively.  I'm starting to see the difference of
knowledge through experience and knowledge through theorizing more
clearly.


Entry: Jittery
Date: Fri Dec  9 16:18:12 EST 2011

I'm feeling a little mania.  Need to be careful for bleedthrough.
Hard to tell if it's genuine or suggestion.  Feels real enough
though..  I'm noting it.



Entry: No-self
Date: Sun Dec 11 14:23:39 EST 2011

Fri + sat evening meditation where uneventful.  Much jitteryness.
Much wandering.  Much desire for going somewhere else.  Desire for
going on a tangent.  Desire for floating in content and good feeling
of novelty.

Morning meditation clearly about suffering.  Much wandering again.

Then I saw some clear visual flickering.  Strobes 5-10 Hz, on-off say
1 second on, 3 seconds off.

After that I had some feeling of insight about separateness and how it
creates suffering, manifested mostly by content (current disagreement
/ misaligned expectation between me and my wife), but also some kind
of fundamental feeling: sadness that this is not necessary.

The rest of the day I had a bit of a backlash.  Much "stuff".  Current
stuff, past stuff.  Feeling of separateness and aggrevation.

Interpretation:

- strobes: vibrations?  From Daniel's book (paraphrased): many
  emotional experiences can be due to suggestion, though the raptures
  often are not.  maybe this could be an indicator of where I'm at on
  the map.. currently I don't know.

- stuff: Ego (illusion of self) bouncing back from the shock of being
  seen as a hindrance or even evil?



Entry: Impermanence
Date: Mon Dec 12 09:09:09 EST 2011

In yesterday's evening meditation, nearing the end of 30 minutes,
there was a moment where time seemed to have been broken up in
discrete events.  Then there was a reaction of fear and also wonder.

This morning I woke up with stomach ake.  Work stress.  I sat down
about 15 minutes until some other life stress turned up.  Focused on
the clenching feeling in my stomach.  The pain, and for the first time
the reaction to the pain separated as a distinct phenomenon, closely
following it up.  This reaction was experienced as a "oh no don't
want" thought-feeling.




Entry: Interpretation
Date: Mon Dec 12 09:11:04 EST 2011

Reading more in MCTB it seems best to refrain from interpretation in
this meditation log, and concentrate on experience, or at least memory
of experience.  I know from past experience that I am very susceptible
to suggestion, so better be careful and not get carried away by the
story of the maps.


Entry: Watching Yuttadhammo
Date: Mon Dec 12 17:29:04 EST 2011

Meditate all day: be mindful.  Your work should be meditation and your
eating should be meditation.

I tried this today with walking our foster dog, which I don't like to
do because he's undisciplined.  Maybe I should do it too with the
current phase of my contract work which I don't like either.  Though
that is concentration-based work..  How to?



Entry: Resentment [stuff]
Date: Wed Dec 14 09:25:11 EST 2011

As advised in MCTB I intend to not go too much into my stuff in
mediation and meta-meditation (this log), but I'd like to mention the
following.  The emotion that seems to dominate most of my suffering in
daily life is resentment caused by "perceived wrong doing from an
individual"[1] or a situation.

( It's interesting that I also feel this from situations, as if
situations have responsibility that can be invoked to attribute blame.
It might not be so surprising that I'm also very susceptible to
feeling blame and the blame-induced guilt. )

Anyways, let's focus on what actually happened in yesterday's 30
minute bedtime meditation.  I got into a feel-good samatha state and
started investigating its 3 characteristics.  Focusing on impermance
and attachment as usual, the feel-good soon faded and disappointment
appeared, followed by resentment ("I deserve this!  If I don't get it
I want to stop meditating!").  I could intercept the resentment and
stare it in the eye, and it also faded.  This is remarkable as it's
probably the first time I consciously sat through resentment without
it pulling the rug from under my feet, without actively trying to feel
better by doing some "me time" activity.

It doesn't stick though.  Woke up this morning thinking about work and
resentment popped up again.  Though now that I've seen it in a
different light, it does look different.

As a side note, I read on the Wikipedia page[1]:

  ... the differences between the three emotions are as follows:
  resentment is directed towards higher-status individuals, anger is
  directed towards equal-status individuals and contempt is directed
  towards lower-status individuals.

That puts an interesting perspective on the targets of resentment,
i.e. that they are considered as "higher-status" which is quite
surprising, but makes sense indeed.  Ties in neatly with that feeling
of insecurity ;)


[1] http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Resentment


Entry: Emptiness
Date: Wed Dec 14 09:39:58 EST 2011

It seems that I can focus quite clearly on impermance and
attachment/suffering, but that emptiness is experienced rather
indirectly, mostly through suffering.  Self seems to be not there many
of the times when sensations and thoughts can be intercepted, but it
just "jumps in front of me" whenever the content train leaves the
station.

The next step might be to go back to the instructions and see how to
focus on emptiness in a more direct way.

What I do see is that the story-style seems to be rooted in a
self-image in a very deep way.  From what I read in MCTB this is far
from what the experience of emptiness is.


Entry: Fear
Date: Thu Dec 15 12:08:32 EST 2011

My noon meditation, a little over 15 minutes.  Lots of wandering.  I
started with a very jittery mind, with a very uncomfortable distracted
feeling.  Before I had tried to quiet it down while sitting at the
computer terminal but that didn't work so well.  It seems formal
sitting meditation is still necessary to get at access concentration
to be able to observe just sensations when I'm not already very calm
in the first place.

So I sat in my usual quiet spot.  Different because of daylight and
the open windows.  A lot of wandering at first but I came to better
concentration later and started using a more aggressive noting
approach.  Before I had moments where there seemed to be nothing to
note, but this turns out to be more about not seeing that those
moments are filled with thinking and imagining.  A very subtle type of
wandering, different from the obvious, content-loaded storylines that
are easier to spot.

After doing this more aggressive approach, somehow forcing myself to a
certain noting frequency, say 2/second, a brief moment of feeling fear
appeared.  Then I stopped to write this entry down.


Interpretation: this is maybe the first time I touched a direct
experience of nothingness?  This aggressive observation seemed to have
catched some of the constructed self thoughts that I didn't see at
first, which freaked me out a bit.  It felt as if something got
snatched by the throat while sneaking around unnoticed before.


Entry: Frustration
Date: Fri Dec 16 17:31:49 EST 2011

It's starting to get frustrated.  I'm having a lot of trouble getting
to focus through the day.  When I sit down, I usually feel better.
The jitteryness usually doesn't stay.  If it stays, it can get more
intense.  Yesterday, first 30 minutes evening meditation was like
that.  I was getting distracted and frustrated with the dog's noises.
Tried to focus on that feeling but it got quite strong and in my face,
not really possible to observe it without it swamping me.

Today after work I felt unconfortably bored.  Sat down, and got into
some samatha feel-good state.  Felt a strong feeling of satisfaction
and clinging.  A "finally! sedation!".



Entry: Background Anxiety
Date: Sat Dec 17 13:22:19 EST 2011

A strange phenomenon.  A particular stuff stressor is causing what I
define as Background Anxiety: a stressed feeling in my stomach that is
there as soon as I start living ordinary life, after being cofronted
with said stuff stressor.  The strange thing is that the moment I sit
down and focus on it, it disappears almost immediately.  If I don't to
this, it keeps stuck.

Now what was clear (body and mind / causality stage?) is that thoughts
trigger those stomach feeling, and clear focus makes this relation
obvious and also makes the sensation loose its grip.  What I don't
understand is that when I'm writing (like now) the gripping feeling is
there quite clearly.  Maybe writing isn't such strong concentration?
Maybe typing just goes too slow wrt. thinking?  When I'm deeply
concentrated on programming and I'm not bound by typing, this sort of
phenomenon does not occur.

It is as if (interpretation) there is some background thought thread
running that perioidically activates/feeds the anxiety.  As if it's
keeping guard, making sure I don't dose off and dive into some fun
activity with full concentration?

Maybe the thing to cultivate is to switch to full concentration
immediately whenver such feelings arise.  Starte them in the face
immediately, and they vanish.  Weird.. I'm trying this now as I'm
writing and it takes only 3-5 seconds after concentrating for the
feeling to come back.

One thing to learn is then, how to have undivided attention while
writing?  I'm trying now to starre more carefully at the letters as
they appear on the screen.  This seems to help a bit.  That leaves
less room for other sensations to arise and maybe counts as a
meditation in itself.  It seems more quiet; leaves more room for the
thoughts that form the sentences, but not easy to maintain.


Entry: Blowout [stuff]
Date: Tue Dec 20 17:55:06 EST 2011

I had a stress-related panick attack today.  Interesting how the whole
experience was a bit surreal.  I was in the middle of it, knowing
(rationally) that it was a self-feeding process, but I was so absorbed
by it that I could not step out.  Once it toned down on its own I
could see it more clearly what just happened.

These reactionary episodes are the main reason why I started
meditating.  To have them stop being such a big deal.  They still
happen, but it seems to be only the big ones that are left.  I'm
still quite surprised I'm intercepting the smaller ones, though.

What makes this blowout so surreal is that I'm experiencing both
brain-operating modes throughout the day: full cloudiness at
stuff-convergience points during the day and clear(er) seeing at
evening meditation and after such blowouts.


Entry: Yesterday
Date: Tue Dec 20 18:07:25 EST 2011

From memory.  I'm experiencing more of the 3rd characteristic
(selflessness) directly.  The first two seem to have been easy to see
when you actually look: impermanence and the arrival of suffering
through attachment.  The observer however has always been there.

Yesterday and in the last couple of days I've had brief moments where
this seems to "flip over" for a brief moment, until fear arises.

Hard to say how much of this is scripted.  Even thinking it is
scripted might be scripted.  Gotta love the circularity of it all..

This weird sensation of selflessness seems to arise when I note more
aggressively.  I have this feeling that some of the time where I think
nothing is happening, I'm actually thinking but can't intercept it.


Entry: Pfff [stuff]
Date: Fri Dec 23 15:33:34 EST 2011

Things suck right now.  I hate christmas.  Meaning, the days before.
Part of this seeing clearly business is that I know that now very
clearly, I really hate christmas, and how people can get so worked up
about the family stuff, the expectations, the trying to keep things
stick together.  Including myself of course.

So I tried to sit with it.  Sit through the shopping in a more mindful
way.  Trying to see that whole pattern of resentment arise and pass
away.  It's funny how even with feeling it seemingly more clearly,
more intense, the lasting effect of it is greatly reduced.

I can't stay angry any more.

Now on to the rest ;)


Entry: Feels like something is coming
Date: Sun Dec 25 13:24:11 EST 2011

More of the meditation is moving towards whole sensate field
observation, and regularly the feeling pops up that something isn't
right.  That I'm not getting why I'm still feeling separateness.

It's hard to describe the experience.  The explanation above seems
almost perfectly scripted/suggested..

Experience of sadness, non-integration.

In daily life, many episodes of resentment, hopelessness, panic,
clearly unmet expectations and related frustration.

Strong sense of separateness in response to current stressful
situation with is out of my control.  After short meditation I clearly
see how the constructed separateness, the clinging to the idea that
"This is not my fault, but I'm victimized anyway." causes the
suffering.

In short, I feel like crap!


Entry: Last days
Date: Thu Dec 29 22:40:01 EST 2011

Lots of frustration and aversion.  One of these days it broke, I went
from "I don't want to sit here" to a calm, aware, happy feeling that
remained after the end of the meditation.

The days after resumed with aversion, confusion, lack of concentration
and more crap.

Today after a long, intense day, a conversation triggered some heavy
dualistic thinking: "you vs. me" + blame.  I just sat down, calmed
down, and started to see this pattern, locking out of it.  Seeing that
compassion is the way to approach this particular situation.

Alright, time for the insight practice.


Entry: Strange experience
Date: Fri Dec 30 11:10:16 EST 2011

I'm experiencing a calm state and a sort of "now what?" thing in the
background.  As if I'm about to make a step but I don't know quite
where.  In this calm state I clearly see a "me" that's waiting for
something to happen, and is getting impatient.  It's a very strong
feeling of separateness.

I also had a quick succession of sadness (with tears) followed by very
disorganized mind.  Then a thought "it's all fluff" triggered, I sat
with it and almost immediately I moved on to a calm state.

[ Interpretation ]

I'm starting to wonder if this is the misery -> reobservation ->
equianimity part of the first path as described in MCTB.  There are
many correlations between what I'm reading and experiencing, but it's
hard to say how much of it is scripted, and the correspondence isn't
100%.  I don't see fear.  I just checked[1], it comes before misery.
Anyways...


[1] http://www.dharmaoverground.org/web/guest/dharma-wiki/-/wiki/Main/MCTB%20The%20Progress%20of%20Insight?p_r_p_185834411_title=MCTB%20The%20Progress%20of%20Insight


Entry: Very calm
Date: Sat Dec 31 21:36:14 EST 2011

Lots of calm.  Deep, deep calm.  Some moments of aggrevation, which I
hit with the "no substance" bat and then it turned to calm again.


Entry: What has changed? [stuff]
Date: Sun Jan  1 21:09:37 EST 2012

Comparing my behaviour now with say two months ago, what has changed?

I don't meander on the internet any more.  I can clearly see the pain
caused by lack of focus, by following scatter-brained discussions.

I can sit quietly.  Before I would have to always be doing something
or obsessively thinking about something.

I have less anxiety.  And when I do, the fear has a face - it can be
related to something concrete.  Less denial maybe.

What hasn't changed?

I'm still overly attached to obsessive about my programming projects,
and experience suffering when things don't go as I planned (they
seldom do).  I still resent work quite often.  I resent being forced
into taking responsibility in life in general.


Entry: Pfff
Date: Mon Jan  2 21:04:37 EST 2012

Good case of fundamental suffering I guess.  Hard time to concentrate,
want to run away from things.  Anyways, the complete opposite of my
"good morality" report from yesterday.

I'm probably giving it another try soon.  Tried 2x30 mins, early this
morning and just now.  Didn't finish either of them, got frustrated
wandering and couldn't sit with the frustration.

This kind of tiredness is hard to deal with as it messes with the core
of concentration.


Entry: Letting go of love
Date: Wed Jan  4 11:04:28 EST 2012

A strange experience yesterday, related to love.  Following the
instruction "observe, let go" I did this when a feeling of love arose.

First, love has never been so radiant and clear to me as in recent
times, doing this kind of observation and "letting it in".

However, when it arose and I let it go in full awareness, not clinging
to it, a great, deep, lasting equanimity arose.  Observed this for a
while, with my eyes open (usually I have trouble with open eyes).

Then I started feeling attachment to this equanimity which I don't
think really ever went away.  After the bell this prolonged for a bit
until I fell asleep.

After that woke up with fear as I had throughout most of the day
yesterday.  Also this morning: uneasiness, a bit of panic, and more
worry about the dog after new developments.



[stuff] [interpretaion] It's kind of new to me to feel this feeling of
love so directly for a dog, but yes, I experienced it and it was
beautiful.  Maybe it is about accepting the possibilities of it being
hurt, i.e. the dog dying.



Entry: Relapse
Date: Sat Jan  7 08:14:55 EST 2012

Last couple of days (wed, thu, fri) where relapse days.  No
concentration, lots of sleepyness.  Trying to know lack of
concentration and sleepyness is hard.


Entry: Re-observation?
Date: Wed Jan 11 12:48:57 EST 2012

Current affairs: lots and lots of resistance to almost everything.

I remember this feeling from before I started dayly practice.  It
feels as "simply disconnected", not wanting to have anything to do
with the real world.

At this time, I feel like that though the writing makes it less
obvious.  Cognitively I see that this is indeed something to "push
through".  But only after sittin gon the cushion for 10 minutes and
walking away, then remembering that staying on that cushion and
sitting through it is exactly the point.

As for going to sit on the cushion in the first place, I don't know.
Possibly I realized that something was not right and that sitting
would provide the answer.

In my current interpretation this state could be nicely summed up by
the 3 characteristics: seeing everything as undesirable, feeling a
clear duality, and not being aware of the impermanence of this state,
looking for quick fixes that make it go away.  So clearly "seeing"
these things but not being "aware" that this is the nature of reality,
and that clinging or pushing doesn't have the intended effect.

So, after writing this I'm going to try again.  Circularity being what
it is, writing this down is probably already a displacement activity,
doing something to not have to sit through it...


Entry: Knowing fear
Date: Wed Jan 11 13:16:42 EST 2012

It's becoming more clear to me that my fear is hidden deep down.

I've seen sadness a lot the last couple of sessions: only very brief,
half a second but intense shots of sadness that lead to the facial
expressions that arise during crying.

Today I got through the resistance mentioned in the previous entry,
arriving at a point of calm but with an insistent contraction in my
stomach.  After more consciously looking at that following a "show
yourself" intent, that feeling went away after exposing itself more
clearly as fear.  Fear of many [stuff] things currently in the air
that have possible but unlikely undesirable outcomes.



Entry: Noon is the problem
Date: Sun Jan 15 09:48:22 EST 2012

I like programming, but I get obsessive which eventually leads to
suffering.  How to manage this better?  How to be mindful hroughout the day?

Usually my mornings start alright, if I slept well.  If I didn't then
I'm launching right into aversion from the beginning, but let's stick
with a day that goes well.

The pattern:

I start to work on something I love, get entrenched in it.  Then I run
into some difficulty, to which I start to react with aversion and
frustration.  This continues for a while until I burn myself out and
get in a mood where I'm so locked into the negative side of obsession
that everything else (my real life outside of this somewhat artificial
hacking world) turns into an unmanageable mess.

This usually happens early afternoon.

I'd like to learn how to catch this before it overtakes me.

Some ideas about mindfulness throughout the day:

- Since it's so predicatble in time, maybe a fixed 1 pm meditation
  session can help?

- Try to catch frustration and aversion when they arise.  These
  emotions seem to always be the trigger.  I get angry when I have a
  "good idea" and it turns out not to align with reality very well.
  When it happens, make sure that awareness of these sensations gets
  to the point where they go away: they are all fluff so are expected
  to pass when given proper attention.

- Somehow set reminders?  The main problem is to get carried away by
  the emotions and ideas.  How to set a reliable alarm that kicks me
  out of it completely?  Sometimes I have so much state in my head
  that I really don't want to stop, being afraid of letting it all die
  and having to restore it.  The truth is that whenever I feel like
  that I'm probably tackling things the wrong way, and the house of
  cards is bound to fall on its own due to the huge amount of effort
  it takes to keep it standing.


Entry: Back on track?
Date: Mon Jan 16 00:27:54 EST 2012

Some things where different today:
- started out happy (got into baking bread lately)
- started noting again after seeing distraction pop up
- felt bliss and rapture

The noting made things seem like they where in the beginning: more
clarity, more stability of concentration.  I somehow stopped doing
that or doing it less rigorously, which is probably the cause of a lot
of the meandering of late.  So why was that?  Maybe there is
resistance against noting itself that wasn't noted?  It takes effort,
so my low energy level in the past week was probably at least part of
it.

Overall I feel quite good today.  The stuff's also better so that
might be simply attachment.


Entry: Today's mindfulness at work
Date: Mon Jan 16 16:00:30 EST 2012

Today I tried to get at the pattern.  Something like this:

 9-12 high-energy high-clarity work.
12-13 first signs of superficial fatigue and joyful stress, short break helps
15-16 first signs of deep fatigue, dispairing stress, in need of "tomorrow" break

I tried meditation at 14:00, which was difficult due to high energy
and a presence of "work to do later" in the form of wandering thoughs
and a tightness in the stomach.  Trying to let go of that a rapture
occured, which seems to happen easier in joyful, energetic states.


Entry: Accepting pain
Date: Thu Jan 26 13:29:35 EST 2012

That's a tough one, isn't it?

I've been using some life stress to observe pain or a queasy feeling
in my somach.  I'm observing a pattern I've discribed before (pain
going away when being concntrated).

I've been using (at least) 2 different approaches:

  - Letting the pain in without resisting it.  Being kind to the pain.
    Greeting it.  In Jack Kornfield's style: "Hello pain, I know you."

  - Focusing on the individual sensations, in Daniel Ingram's style:
    trying to see through the solidified object (pain in my stomach)
    to see what flickering sensations it is made of.

Both seem to work, though the second one is harder.  Maybe because it
relies less on suggestion and more on concentration and observation.
Though the latter one is more profound.  The former treats the pain
with love, the latter treats it with courage.  The latter indeed shows
me rising/falling at a greater detail than the solidified pain.


Entry: Morning meditation
Date: Mon Jan 30 08:49:13 EST 2012

- obsessive, resentful mind
- strong tendency to "be somewhere else"
- very shallow breath, almost not there (caffeine?)
- queasy stomach (coffee? hunger?)


Entry: Loving Kindness & Insight
Date: Sat Feb  4 09:43:37 EST 2012

I joined an IM circle guided by Dan.  Wednesday was the second
sitting, where he focused on Metta in the second part.  While not
strictly IM, according to Dan Metta practice is something that comes
together with Vipassana after a while, but it is important to start
doing both as separate practices in the beginning.

I'm having a hard time doing this, which probably means that he's right ;)

It seems that Metta is a good way to approach the third characteristic
(unity / separateness) and the second characteristic (attachment).
With compassion and loving-kindness resp.

I think I sometimes stumble into this kind of practice when I
accedentally open up during insight practice, i.e. when I observe
attachment face of love.  This "letting go of love" I discribed
earlier seems to be the opening up that is the goal of Metta practice.

Googling a bit.. It might be interesting to read this thread [1].  I'm
getting on a morning caffeine trip and finding it hard to focus.

[1] http://www.dharmaoverground.org/web/guest/discussion/-/message_boards/message/2433670


Entry: Anxiety, deconstructing the feeling
Date: Sat Feb  4 10:35:11 EST 2012

Using more precise observation I've reached a point where it is
possible in say 50% of the times to deconstruct the feeling in my
stomach that is associated to anxiety (non-directed or not clearly
directed fear).

Instead of the solidified feeling of a "stone" or a "clenched fist",
looking at it more closely without resistint it, a much more
turbulent, non-constant pattern emerges.  It feels a bit like waves of
tension, starting in a center and bubbling outwards.  The bubbling
isn't constant either, it comes in salvos.

I'm not able to control the rising of it, but observing it does seem
to release some of the clenching involved.


Entry: [stuff] Anxiety, Resentment and Boredom
Date: Sat Feb  4 10:44:14 EST 2012

Man, there is a lot of anxiety and resentment!  Much more than I was
aware of.  My overall approach to it is still not being aware of it,
trying to make it go away.  I'm aware of the more obvious ones, but
there's a whole world of hidden attachments that I'm only beginning to
see.

One of them is boredom.  I really don't like doing things that I've
already figured out, and that just need the last mile of "maintenance
attention" to put the details in place.  Much of my motivation seems
to be about the elimination of nuisance (scratching that itch),
wanting that relief so badly.  When I get the idea that a certain task
will probably be much more unpleasant than just ignoring the itch it's
trying to scratch, then bye bye motivation.

I've never thought of it like this, but Jack Kornfield describes
boredom as a form of judgement.  Paraphrased: something isn't worthy
of my time because it will not bring me the right amount of pleasant
stimulation in exchange for painful effort.


Entry: Equanimity
Date: Sun Feb  5 21:14:45 EST 2012

This whole day was weird.  Circumstances made me a bit nervous this
morning, and I've been trying to apply mindfulness to the day.  I'm
procrastinating (taxes) which put me in a bit of denial/separateness
space.  Afternoon was very stimulating (dog training going well) which
gave a bit of grounding.

Evening meditation was very peaceful.  Can't really remember much of
phenomena, but there was a clear open space and lots of vibrations.
Broad field.

Concentrated on that feeling in my stomach that has been popping up a
lot lately.  Something keeps it there.  I don't tink it has a physical
origin, it feels too much like stress when the stressor is clear, but
there's no clear stressor.

It seems to vanish when I focus on releasing my idea of "grip on
things".  Earlier today the idea to "let go of *everything*" came to
mind when meditating.  Trying to do so made the feeling disappear,
with a feeling of something else opening and space becoming larger.

I also fell it shrink again with the pain immediately reappearing when
thoughts popped up that where of the nature of "after meditating, I'm
going to ...".

Interpretation: something seems to be presenting itself but I can't
really put my finger on it.  It's at least related to a certain guilt
I feel about "not doing anything", or "idling".  It's hard to describe
but it seems that often I have things running in the background that
I'm not fully aware of.  Staring at the physical manifestations
sometimes helps, but it seems that often you need some kind of nudge
to know where *else* to look.  In my case here it's about letting go
of the context of meditation, being the allotted time slot that felt
like keeping everything inside a bottle.



Entry: Good day
Date: Tue Feb  7 20:16:41 EST 2012

Somewhat of a little stress ride in the middle, but overall I have the
impression today was different.  More naturally in the moment, and
more naturally recovering back to base line after getting excited
about someting.  I feel happy.


Entry: The No-Complaining Bracelet
Date: Sat Feb 11 11:15:48 EST 2012

[1] http://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=3578459


Entry: Good days
Date: Sat Feb 11 11:16:11 EST 2012

Things are different.  There is more happiness.  I still get stuck.  I
still jump on the train, every day, but after a while, depending how
fast the train is going, I notice I'm buying into the story and can
let it go.

[stuff] Yesterday was like that.  Took a day off with her but
somehow got into a bad mood in the morning.  I retreated into a used
book store, and sat there while she went into another store.  Was
reading [1] and practicing noticing.  Things cleared out after that.
This is new.  I used to get into moods like this, not knowing what
happened, but staying stuck for the whole day.

[1] http://www.accesstoinsight.org/lib/authors/mahasi/progress.html


Entry: Cycles
Date: Sat Feb 11 18:22:36 EST 2012

Life has its cycles soaked in irony.  Right after writing the previous
post things start going downhill.  Wound up in a spiral of reactivity,
blame, resent, sadness, disappointment, ...  I don't even know how I
got there, but it was a gradual build-up from unnoticed little
annoyances..

I sat with it for half an hour after external factors allowed, and the
feeling in my stomach didn't really go away, which probably means the
core of it wasn't observed fully.  Storylines came up right after
leaving the cushon.  I'm still holding on to it.  The insight was that
it really is attachment, getting into a blind alley without noticing
that it's the actual clenching that makes it hurt so much..  Though
that seems to be enough only in the moment.  The longer the clenching
persists, the longer it can feed itself and the firmer it can lock in.
Noticing that it is attachment only released temporarily during
meditation.  The automatic took over right away again, keeping the
suffer-momentum going.

Tried some loving-kindess too, but it just doesn't seem to get
anywhere in this kind of state..  Just unable to open up.

What seems to be the trick is to truly accept it.  From Jack
Kornfield's book (paraphrased): accept that the unwanted emotions are
going to be there for a while, or will come back later.  Only when
that is fully acknowledged, then the clenching tends to release.

Acceptance is hard.

Back to the cushon, not done yet :)


Entry: Morning judgement
Date: Sun Feb 12 09:42:39 EST 2012

Basically, the stuff that drives procrastination.  I've been thinking
a while to do work as mindfulness exercises.  The toughest time to do
this is the morning, waking up right into judgement: "no, I don't want
to".

I've been reading about Affective Freedom yesterday.  Seems related to
IM in that the practice is mindfulness-based, but its focus is more
clearly on happiness[1].

[1] http://actualfreedom.com.au/
[2] http://dharmaoverground.org/web/guest/discussion/-/message_boards/message/2401384



Entry: Challenge
Date: Sun Feb 12 22:16:12 EST 2012

Tried twice to bring up "stuff" memories to see how the train starts
moving, and indeed it did in both occasions.  I tried to focus on what
happens at the moment of gaining awareness of the now, how the
memories fade and how they immediately loose their grip once you step
out of the story.

It seems that a lot of the good feeling is still quite conditional on
some memories not arising.  When they do arise and I don't catch them
early, they take off.

And what becomes more clear: all the stories are about "me".  Not
about real issues, but about the threatening of ego.  Most of them
take the form of me responding to a disagreement, initiated by another
person's expressed opinion or behaviour.

From memory, that's not true..  There are storylines that are not
about human interactions too, but those are not so emotional.  They
are more about curiosity.



( I had the laptop in front of me to record experiences, but it seems
to be more of a distraction to log every idea that comes to mind..
Let's focus a bit more. )

- solar plexus.  looks like that's my best point of focus, since
  everything seems to be happening there.  any emotion that comes up
  manifests there first.  when I just look at the breath, I don't
  notice queasiness creeping up.

- the story about me.  it's there, mostly about inferiority and
  superiority, comparison, judgement, and resentment through perceived
  superiority in others.  it's the same as it ever was, but it's
  getting silly.  maybe that's a sign of progress.  something in me
  seems to be trying to step out of that loop, while the loop itself
  just keeps on playing and reinforcing itself.

- aside from the "me" stuff there's the just wandering stuff.  the
  "lalala i'm idling..  wow this mat is interesting."



Entry: Where do I want to go next?
Date: Sun Feb 12 22:47:46 EST 2012

- Find mindfulness in the morning.

- Find mindfulness in a boring task, probably also in the morning.

- Find mindfulness in "no, I don't want to do that now".

- Practice concentration.  It seems to be easier to cut the "me"
  loops, becauuse they are so emotional.  It's harder to catch
  ordinary wandering.

- Compassion & loving-kindness.  Didn't do much of Dan's instruction
  these weeks because there seemed to be more important matters to
  take care of, though the few times that I managed to do it or
  stumbled into it, it definitely seemed worthwhile.  Opening up is
  something I need in daily life.



Entry: On the path
Date: Sun Feb 12 23:41:42 EST 2012

I started this log when starting to read Daniel Ingram's book.  So
where am I on the path?  I don't know.  If I would guess, I'd say
reobservation and early equianimity.  What seems recognisable is the
piercing through the "all fluff" of reobservation into the quiet open
space of early equanimity, though this could also be pre-A&P.

If it's equanimity, I must have had an account of the dark night.  And
I recall a lot of time spent in misery, crying about a deep deep
feeling of sadness about the clear link between suffering and its
causes, i.e. my own choices and choices of people around me.

Disgust I've not seen so much of, only in it's lesser form of
disinterest and boredom.  Though there have been moments when I
clearly felt "home sick" for an illusion of permanence.

Fear following insights was definitely there a couple of times.  Most
fear however was fear for possible future real-world situations,
i.e. worry.



What worries me is that I feel better on the cushon overall: the heavy
emotions do not arise so much, but that happiness makes me sloppy.
Also, I don't tend to oversit.  I stick to 30 minutes pretty much,
with some continuation in bed, where I usually fall asleep.

And then there's the mornings.  They suck.  No, they are beautiful but
they are also filled with desire and attachment.  They start to suck
when obsession or aversion sets in.  I'm just not aware/awake until
hours after I get out of bed..


Entry: Responsibility and Panic [stuff]
Date: Mon Feb 13 21:00:07 EST 2012

Be honest about doing what you can, and be done with feeling guilty
when it turns out not to be adequate.

I'm in a situation at work where there is a form of risk I'm not
familiar with.  A form of risk where tiny mistakes can have huge
consequences.  My mind is terrified by this, and it only wants to
mitigate the risk by adding safe guards everywhere, while there is
really no time to do so.  The main point seems to be being careful and
always fully aware, which from experience is not my strong point, and
it often goes wrong.

It has caused a lot of stress in the past.  It's better now than
before, but there are still flareups of panic.

I've been working with this fear in meditation, to try to see it
clearly.  What comes up is the notion of honesty (that I did/do my
best) and acceptance of imperfection.  The honesty boils down to
really paying attention without resentment (about having to use a
particular tiresome approach) and blame, or any form of judgement.
What happens however is that thus judgement gets in the way and cloud
clear thinking.  It is directly opposing honesty; it's not possible to
be honest about being judicious while there is any form of judgment
going on.

Bad judgements get in the way of good judgement.


Entry: Unsatisfactoriness
Date: Thu Feb 16 16:56:22 EST 2012

Trying to move into unsatisfactoriness directly, following more of
Daniel's advice.  Having a tough day today after my morning outing.
Brain doesn't really want to cooperate.  Feeling boredom,
dissatisfaction.

Today is the perfect time, but I don't really want to ;)

I ate a huge heavy burger yesterday.  Maybe there's some correlation..


Entry: Meditation at Work
Date: Sat Feb 18 17:19:47 EST 2012

I study a lot.  Currently I'm learning the Haskell programming
language, which is a treasure trove of beatiful abstractions that are
rarely encountered in any other programming community.  However it is
quite hard; I'm constantly surfing my limit of understanding.

Recently (or recent years) I've been getting frustrated by a "wanting
to understand" state of mind.  At some point I get tired and get
really confused.  This feels pretty bad.  At such a point I can hardly
let it go, so I try harder and get more confused usually.  It spirals.
I think I "should" be able to get something and of course then it's
really hopeless to ever get there, mixing tiredness with a bunch of
extra emotions that take more energy to sustain..

It's interesting how this works.  I really like learning.  Getting to
clarity about things is a very nice experience.  However when clarity
doesn't come as expected, when things are too difficult or too hard to
absorb at a particular time, the good feelig can easily turn into
frustration or resentment.  It's basicly greed for understanding.

I'm trying to train myself into remembering Daniel's advice about
investigating unsatistfactoriness: "How exactly do I know that this
current phenomenon is unsatisfactory / desirable?"

The first thing that happens when this thought pops up (or more
correctly the observation pattern in refers to) is that the intensity
of the desire desolves.  Sometimes it can disappear completely so
quickly that this trick seems magical.  Immediately a desire to have
this control all the time pops up!

So I've been trying this a lot lately.  There seems to be some
improvement in intercepting sprialling thoughts.

What also comes to mind when seeing this is the relationship with
no-self.  I seem to have somehow correlated/observed directly the
correlation betwee desire and separateness.  The wanting to take or
push away makes the boundary between self and other very clearn: it's
the thing you cross when pushing or pulling!

Maybe that's going to be my vehicle?  Desire and separateness?



Entry: Strong desire
Date: Wed Feb 22 09:24:31 EST 2012

Yesterday was challenging.  Hard to concentrate on work due to lot's
of noise in the house which lead to some agitation and (deeper hidden)
resentment.  Conflict popped up at the end of the day, not directly
about this but highly likely indirectly so.

I did reclining meditation for about 30-45 minutes followed by sitting
meditation for 45 minutes.  Focus on the emotional turbulence and the
undesirability of it (2nd char).  Experienced some brief moments of
insight where it all seemed to "click": my attachment to the situation
went away, making room for equianimity, settling in reality.  These
didn't last long though.  Pull into the emotions and attachment was
very strong.  Attachment to reaching that "click" arose, making the
whole meditation experience into a contradiction (experiencing wanting
to experience unwanting/letting-go).

I can see that there is indeed freedom from this particular form of
suffering.  And I can see that what is necessary to see that freedom
is strong mindfulness.  Some of these mental habits are so deeply
ingrained...  It really does take practice to see them clearly.



Entry: Resentment against concentration
Date: Wed Feb 22 10:39:07 EST 2012

Stress is rising these days, and I have trouble concentrating on my
work.  I wonder if I can turn this piece of suffering ("Pff, I really
can't focus on this stuff now, leave me alone.") into a meditation
exercise.

EDIT: I managed to get started but it was more of a desparate move
than anything else.  Sinking away into something..


Entry: Lost
Date: Wed Feb 22 20:12:53 EST 2012

Totally lost in samsara..  Had a beer, browsing the intarwebs, and
vanishing small attention span.  From this side there seems to be no
cure, just indulgence.

Drinking that Duvel was a bonehead move.  I was restless, now I'm
dense too..  I had a sprint of motivation untill I found out about my
reduced abilities, so couldn't do what I planned.


Entry: Shallow
Date: Sat Feb 25 08:41:08 EST 2012

Things have been more shallow last couple of days.  I feel tranquil,
at ease, but there seems to be no movement after that.

Restlessness (re-observation?) passes quicker these days.  There seems
to be some basic insight that piercing through the fluff by just
observing is the wise reaction.  This almost always leads to
tranquility and a broader view, but it really takes the awareness of
the "all fluff" part to move on.

Fear has been arising from time to time in ordinary life when there is
a silent moment.  Some sense of "being" that's different.  As if I'm
no longer in a movie, but really just observing without any history,
as if my life story is just a dream, and the only thing I can trust is
right in front of me.  Scary.

Waking up in the morning is hard still.  Especially when there's stuff
already going on in the house, I feel aversion.  I do catch the
aversion in most cases, but not deeply enough to see it pass until I'm
fully awake.

I've also been noting again on some occasions as this seems to be the
area where I slack the most.  The thing is that doing this in the
style of MCTB indeed is a bit of a marathon.  It does keep you firmly
in the present though, and the tendency & desire to wander becomes
very obvious this way.  Maybe that's why it is so hard: it really
eliminates the wandering which can feel quite pleasant if you're in a
calm, open state.




Entry: MCTB
Date: Sat Feb 25 21:32:17 EST 2012

Strange day today.  Been working a bit on an art project, hit some
bumps.  Got very quite exhausted and fed up, then this disgust seemed
to continue during the day.  Took a nap, still the same..

Might be meditation-related then as it really seems to come out of
nowhere (except for the strong attachment to the work that's tiring me
out).

Reading MCTB again, page 204: The Progress of Insight[1].

  The first vipassana jhana is about building up the basic skills of
  what is a physical sensation, what is a mental sensation, how they
  relate, and what the Three Characteristics feel like in practice.

  The Arising and Passing away is about seeing this very clearly and
  profoundly for the object of meditation.

  The Dark Night is about these insights then coming around to the
  background and seeing more complex emotional and psychological
  constructs of mental and physical sensations as they are.

  The fourth vipassana jhana, meaning this stage, is about seeing the
  true nature of even more complex, inclusive, subtle and fundamental
  things, like space, awareness, investigation, wonder, expectation,
  anticipation, peace, ease, questioning, and those sorts of things in
  ways that cut through the center and include the whole background
  and foreground as well.

About equanimity:

  The arising of some sort of fear of madness and death is not
  uncommon at this stage, ...



[1] http://www.dharmaoverground.org/web/guest/dharma-wiki/-/wiki/Main/MCTB%2011.%20Equanimity




Entry: Last week
Date: Fri Mar  2 14:29:47 EST 2012

Looks like I didn't write anything down.  Last week was uneventful,
apart from the walking meditation session @ the meeting hosted by Dan:
an interesting experience; so much richness that you usually don't
see.

The rest was attempting to see the background.  I'm trying to be aware
of being tired, depleted after a day of work.  It feels like my brain
is on fire.  Instead of "flatness" what I would expect, there seems to
be a violent fire of not fully formed ideas & images coming and going
at a very fast pace.  It feels more like "pre-ideas".  Activations
without "snap" into well-formed image.

I've also been watching a lecture series[1] by Michael Gazzaniga which
was quite interesting.  Especiall the middle lecture about the
"Interpreter" is quite interesting.  See for yourself!

I also re-watched Dan Ingram Talk at Cheetah House 3/3 on
equanimity[2]. I'm still quite clueless about how the maps correspond
to where I am with my practice, but at least the subtle awareness that
is supposed to arise in the stage of equanimity starts to make sense
to me, but I'm definitely not in a space where I can sit for a long
time.  Maybe my head is in the dark night and my tail somewhere in
early equanimity?

One of the things that started to make sense is "watching
concentration" or watching the inability to concentrate, or the
absence of wonder and interest.  Thinking of this, watching the
presence of wonder and concentration is still quite hard.  Maybe I m
not quite there yet..

( EDIT: Reading that again it sounds more like a description of
  dissolution. )

Apart from wondering about equanimity, just as the week before I've
been using the question "how exactly do I know that this sensation is
undesirable" when faced with aversion.  Duality becomes more clear at
least when I snap out of it and start watching, both in positive and
negative emotional states.

[1] http://www.ed.ac.uk/news/all-news/gifford-071009
[2] http://vimeo.com/28182481





Entry: Can't do it
Date: Fri Mar  2 14:51:13 EST 2012

I'm starting to get interested in the feeling of "I can't do this", as
it arises in daily life when being forced to do a difficult task when
there is no natural tendency to problem-solving.  ( Which I do
experience often as it is basically what I do and like. )

I'm starting to suspect that in many cases this is really more
resentment and boredom than anything else.  Resentment about being
forced to concentrate on something that isn't worth the pain.

Its interesting how the pain involved in mental effort sometimes is
really invisible and completely overshadowed by the "need to know".

One fact seems to be that at some points intelligence (the ability to
understand something clearly) diminishes with fatigue.  However, it
never goes away completely: even if I feel I can't do anything, if
something interesting pops up I'm immediately back on track.

Somehow it seems that the last part of the downward spiral of
tiredness is a feedback loop: because of resentment more energy is
burned in worrying about not being able to work or work fast enough.



Entry: On remembering advice
Date: Fri Mar  2 15:53:34 EST 2012

The advice being: "there is something in your sensate field that
you're ignoring".  The context: inability to open up in Metta
practice.

I can experience the feeling of not being able to open up quite
directly, however the thing that I'm ignoring is usually quite hard to
find.  Actually I have both experiences.  Sometimes just the act of
sitting down on the cushion can immediately pinpoint what exactly is
going on, however in most cases it takes some patience.  Once I gain
awareness of the situation and then awareness of this particular
advice I gain some direction and usually I find some form of clenching
that, when observed, releases in a very natural way.

I've realized that 1) being aware that you are stuck when you are
stuck - braking the cycle - is a big challenge, and 2) the act of
remembering the advice about what to do in this situation isn't a
conscious thing you can control!  It either pops up and lets you take
a step back, or it doesn't and leaves you running in
circles.  Fascinating how this al works.



Entry: Observing the effects of alcohol
Date: Fri Mar  2 20:56:13 EST 2012

( EDIT: I rarely drink alcohol in the U.S. but preparing going to
  Belgium for a visit I feel some urge to "get back into the mood".
  One of my impressions of the U.S. is that alcoholism seems to be
  much more of a problem here.  I had the same impression of the U.K.
  Many people I meet here have a history of overconsumption and
  switched to not drinking at all.  At home things seem to be
  different, more moderate.  Alcohol is much more part of daily life,
  but there are more social rules and boundaries.  Going too far and
  loosing control or behaving impolitely is not appreciated.  I
  actually chanced into an interesting article about this topic
  recently [1]. )

There is a deep feeling of freedom when being intoxicated, at least in
the early stages.  It also brings back memories of other times spent
in the same state.  Something that doesn't seem nearly as romantic in
the aftermath of sweating out the poison..

It is strange that this affinity towards those states is not there
when the drug wears out.  And from memory I know this doesn't last
long.  Even while drinking there is a point where impairment wins out
over enthousiasm.

I don't want to use the word illusion because the experience is as
real as it gets.  The early stages of intoxication are truly
uplifting, energizing, motivating, relaxing, focusing, even cleansing.

There is also a feeling of "no problem".  The complexities of life
seem to vanish, which is one of its greatest qualities.

Also from experience, but being in the initial "rush".  The first
stage feels so good that one is inclined to keep drinking.  Though
that quickly wears out.



Ping...  First sign of wear-out.  I think about an hour after starting
my first glass.  It's a strange feeling of the "real world" piercing
through.  It's some kind of desire to be able to think clearly while
this is no longer possible.  It's is predominated by a feeling that
this intoxication business is really just an illusion, i.e. fake.

That doesn't seem to be the case though.  (from very recent memory)
The first stage really feels authentic, so it must be some kind of
chemical balance that shifts after an hour or so, going down the
drain.  It goes from feeling "real, but different" to feeling like
you've just been scammed.

From memory I recognize that moment, but I didn't recall it was so
sudden and so definitive.  Regret is starting too.

Social awareness is starting too.  "I shouldn't be doing this."

Regret.

Thirst ;)

Really, a deeper physical feeling of thirst.  Not like (from memory)
desire and appreciation for the feeling of the beer going over the
lips into the throat.  Granted, that still feels good but the prime
motivation of actually drinking that glass seems to have shifted to
thirst.

Vipassana binge.

Hilarious.  Laughter.

Silliness is starting to set in.  And fear that this experiment will
soon lose its driver.

Laughter again.

Appreciation of absurdities.

Looking up the link[1] below.

In parallel while googling, starting to realize that I didn't really
start this as an experiment until after I had my first couple of sips
and started to get into the exiting part of the trip.  I was actually
learning some new programming tricks for a couple of minutes before.

Confusion.

Starting to do multiple things at once, getting easily distracted.

Starting to mix up words in google searches.

First realization that I need to stop.  I had about 1/4 gallon.  I'm
not sure about the strength of this beer though, it doesn't say.  It's
maybe slightly more than pilsener but not much.  It's an ale.

A 1/4, That's 4 Belgian pintjes.  Makes sense, that's what I remember
being the border between just going out for a little drink (spreading
it out over a bit more time than I just did) and starting on a binge.

Found the link[1].

Re-appreciation for reality.

From memory I know that stopping and jently coming down does leave you
in a bit of an intoxicated state, but with more of a natural feel.
From experience this is the state that does most damage because it's
quite insidious.  Things feel normal but you are stuck with an altered
personality: lack of judgement and empathy and a lot of
short-sightedness.  It's hard to see that directly though.  It really
feels normal; only the memory is there to tell you that it isn't, that
you might have acted or decided differently on other occasions.

15 more minutes passed.  I'm done with this.  I definitely don't want
to get drunk.  Yawning.  Time to go to bed and vegitate.  I suppose my
meditation today isn't going to be easy.  Probably better wait a bit
until this wears out because concentrating is not something I'm able
to do right now.

Of course, the obligatory email writing frenzy is starting.  I find
this one of the interesting properties of alcohol, and it seems to be
happening later in the trip when things feel more normal: ease of
social interaction.  Ease of crossing bordersb with a fealing of
authenticity that is otherwise hard to come by.

Maybe this whole ordeal isn't so bad at all as long as you're able to
keep it within bounds.  There is definitely a point of loosing it ...

( Thirst.  Getting some water. )

... when you go too far, but the altered perspective is worth it.
Even if it all seems naive after sobering up.  Maybe that's what
ordinary life needs more of.  Navet.




[1] http://www.gladwell.com/2010/2010_02_15_a_drinking.html



Entry: Follow up
Date: Sat Mar  3 11:13:31 EST 2012

Had a very good night of sleep.  Yesterday night's experiment was
interesting.  I'm glad I still know where to stop though, but after
all it's quite a limiting perspective being at the other side of it
again.  Alcohol narrows your view, and it definitely takes away
awareness of some of the social complexities daily life is fraught
with.

Feeling good today.  Just doodling I'm starting to see that I'm
working too hard.  Not enough play.  Glad some time off is coming up.


EDIT: Starting the 2nd half of that keg; finishing it before it goes
rotten.  I don't feel the initial excitement from yesterday.  Feel
mostly flat.

EDIT: Morning after.  Yesterday seemed different.  It's striking that
the 2nd day it already becomes "normal".  I could definitely feel the
desire for alcohol coming up in the late afternoon.  This stuff is
definitely addictive.

The feeling of flatness continued until I went to bed.  Had some panic
attacks waking up, mostly centered around work stress.  It felt like
that open space I've been feeling lately and also in my afternoon
meditation was completely gone.  Conclusion, which I already knew:
alcohol is OK as long as you can resist drinking too much.  However it
is hard to remember the bad feeling of the downhill if you haven't
experienced it for a while.  The memory of the good uphill part seems
to last a lot longer, taking away the resistance to give in to
indulgement.

Maybe an interesting experiment is to note the effects of caffeine and
make a report of my usual morning experience.


Entry: Today
Date: Sun Mar  4 21:07:30 EST 2012

I think I had a bit of a hangover.  The tiredness at around 8pm gave a
very nice sit though, I think more of a concentration feel.  The
thinking part is kind of numb from the slight hangover and
concentration-work today, so this makes it easier to just let thoughts
go; they seem to be only fragments.  Might try some meditation when
really tired.  Though I already noticed that tired + disgruntled about
stil being up is a hard combination to crack.

I'm attempting to focus more on the background, the watcher.  Space
has become more apparent.  The whole sensate field feels more
coherent.  A strange impression arises that "I've seen all this
before".  Especially when I was a kid, say 9-10 y/o, watching the
clock at my grandma's while lying down on the couch.

My early day however was soaked in resentment.  Hard to be mindful
when reality hits you in the face with too many things at once.  That
particular feeling of being overwhelmed seems to be triggering the
spiral a lot.  Might be good to train to catch it.  My impression was
that the early part of the hangover decreased awareness and launches
you straight into storyland.

Overall from these 2 days of consuming alcohol I had quite a bad
experience, mostly from the day after.  The only thing good, really
was the initial ramp-up on the first night.


Entry: Anxiety
Date: Thu Mar  8 09:21:50 EST 2012

Experiencing fear without anything to latch on to.  Headless fear,
mostly harmless when noticed.


Entry: Back in Belgium
Date: Tue Mar 13 02:25:57 CET 2012

Started again formally yesterday, 20 mins.  For the days before that I
did what I could here and there.  On the plane it didn't really work.
I'm not sure why.  I got in this state of reduced clarity that was
actually quite nice.  Just floating, reading a book.  I did watch
dissatisfaction after a while; sitting there squeezed in my seat with
all the other people squeezed in theirs.  Today was a busy day for the
busy day, fixing some things that don't need too much thinking.  Also
nice, but time to come down from it.


30 mins.  This one went deeper.  Ended in deep concentration, with
time apparently moving faster as usual when watching the clock.  Some
sadness that lead to tears.  A transation from chaos to calm
somewhere, again after noticing and using the "all fluff" technique;
taking the chaos as is instead of resisting, which makes it pass.
Before that I had some restlessness in middle 10 minutes.  The first
ten minutes took me from being absorbed in life to being in a calm
place.





Entry: Identifying with intelligence
Date: Wed Mar 14 20:26:20 CET 2012

"Wit" is something weird.  It's not always there.  In my whole life
I've always had the impression of being quite intelligent, but at the
same time, also fairly naive and insecure.  I've come to look at this
as if the intelligence (and it's close companion curiosity) is
sometimes just not "switched on".  That part of my brain that looks
for connections and finds them in flashes is easily washed away by
strong emotions like fear or anger, or even resentment (boredom), and
in times like this when I'm experiencing the symptoms of a common
cold.

But to come to the wisdom part: I've always identified with being
smart.  Then if it's just not working for some reason, I feel as if
I'm not myself, or more strongly, as if I'm failing, falling short.

I feel miserable when I have a cold, and it starts to dawn on me that
this is really mostly because I can't think straight and I get angry
about this fact: some cycle of blame and not living up to that self
image starts to go on a roll.



Entry: The interpreter
Date: Wed Mar 14 21:31:39 EDT 2012

Suggestion, the interpreter and paths.  One of the things that is so
intriguing in meditation practice is the interplay of experience and
story.  The eventual goal being to somewhat eliminate story and end up
in pure experience, but the way to get to that point is by
incorporating techniques and practices that can only be communicated
through story and before actually experienced, need to somehow be
described in words to make it all make sense.

What I find so interesting is that in experimental psychology, that
story is not taken as seriously as what can be measured.  Recent
neurologic research seems to indicate there is a module in the brain
that actually does all this post-hoc interpretation of facts, and it's
often wrong.

I'm a bit sick still so the point might be not so clearly articulated,
but what I'm getting at is: what would be the right way to study
experience and meditation practice such as it is described in the
story surrounding buddhism, without relying too much on this fuzzy
module?




Entry: Cold & partial awareness
Date: Wed Mar 14 21:58:26 EDT 2012

I just experienced "waking up" from the dull state that goes together
with peak symptoms of a common cold.  It's a wonderful feeling of
"getting my wit back".  As described in a previous post, it seems I
can get quite averse to feeling dull, almost to a point of panic that
wit might never come back again!  We are such situational beings..

So it came back.  Curiosity came back.





Entry: Taking breaks
Date: Fri Mar 16 01:56:28 CET 2012

Sometimes just letting go of a forced focus can be enough to find an
out-of-the-box solution.  It happened to me again today, working for a
long stretch, then realizing it was time for a break.  Just walking
out of the room in the mind set of "I'm on a break" was enough for
some solution to pop up through a channel that seemed to have been
blocked by my forcing a particular way of looking at the problem.

Seems that freedom and creativity go hand in hand, and frustration and
dullness also.

The thing is that it doesn't work when you take a break, but not
really take a break, i.e. not let go of the mental clinging to the
problem, or more specifically to the frustration of not finding a
solution.  It's really about letting go, free-floating that lets
background thinking emerge.



Entry: Good sit
Date: Thu Mar 22 00:20:27 CET 2012

Had a 50 minute sit yesterday.  Had to break it off a couple of
minutes before the hour mark because it started to feel pointless.  i
had been struggling a lot in that sit.  Got some spiralling thing
going on in daily life.  Lots of turbulence until I realized the "it's
all fluff" idea.  This didn't actually move me forward until some kind
of perspective shift happens, which landed me into a feeling of peace
after accepting the reality of now.  I felt cleansed after the sit.  I
could "just lie down" on the bed afterwards, not being driven to
mindlessly browse the internet.  I have a feeling of being back on
track, though today I didn't sit yet.  Was reading dharma overground
about Florian's awakening[1].

I feel as if the time I've been here back in Belgium have been in a
bit of a haze.  There was jet lag, some acute common cold attack and
some drinking and all of them took away alertness.

The other one[2] is also nice.  Some funny quote:

  I've joked to some friends that there seems to be something built
  into reality which instantly renders any conceptualization of truth
  as gibberish.

[1] http://dharmaoverground.org/web/guest/discussion/-/message_boards/message/2057150
[2] http://dharmaoverground.org/web/guest/discussion/-/message_boards/message/2691213


Entry: Fear of knowing
Date: Thu Mar 22 01:34:22 CET 2012

Today's "show me what I need to see" resolution brought this up:

Afraid of looking.
Fear of knowing.
Desire for ignorance.



Entry: Emotional turbulence
Date: Sat Mar 24 21:37:17 CET 2012

Lots of crisis around me.  Lots of suffering.  Some identification
with the emotions.  Some strange mix of aversion and compassion.

Strange sit.  I feel quite out of it in general.  I'm experiencing a
strange pull towards sitting.  I might be using it as an escape.

After reading Florian's post (see previous entries and [1]) I think
something switched about the story of meditation itself.  The main
poin in that thread is about the seeker not getting what is sought,
and the whole seek thing dissolving into irrelevance.

[1] http://dharmaoverground.org/web/guest/discussion/-/message_boards/message/2691213


Entry: More weirdness
Date: Sun Mar 25 13:39:10 CEST 2012

Could be too much stimulation in the last couple of days.  If there's
anything on the MCTB path that rings a bell it's "disgust".  I'm
terribly unhappy with how the world works, and I want my illusion back.


Entry: Response to Fear of knowing
Date: Sun Mar 25 13:59:16 CEST 2012

Feeling more rational ATM, or should I say more attached to the
presumed correctness of my rational world-modeling ;)

Remembering from [1].  What happened here was interesting.  I
interpret it as a residual fear coming from early religious
indoctrination, i.e fear coming from the "God knows what you're
thinking" idea and the subsequent attempt to control thinking, to not
go into "bad stuff".

The fear that comes with "shouldn't be thinking about that" is still
presents itself from time to time.

Anyway, what I want to talk about is intention.  It's a strange thing,
but it seems to be important somehow in guiding/priming subjective
experience.  MCTB mentions making "strong resolutions" from time to
time.

[1] entry://20120325-133910


Entry: Overwhelmed
Date: Sun Mar 25 14:17:10 CEST 2012

This log is moving from a sit log to a moment-to-moment introspection
log.  What does the feeling of being overwhelmed by emotions feel
like?  Some characteristics:

It kills motivation and curiosity.  This seems most obvious.  Too much
stuff going on around me and I collapse into a state of depression.
Usually not chronic as there are things that can lift me out of it,
i.e. some positive emotion or a thought that pops up, triggering
curiosity.  Closely investigating this state of depression itself
usually exposes attachment, i.e. clinging to an image of an idealized,
worry-free life that I might have had if I had taken some different
routes.

Maybe by definition, but being overwhelmed is hard to overcome.  It
presents itself as a distinct sensation: a wave of things coming at
me, pressing me down, making me give up.  Maybe it is interesting to
learn more about this sensation itself?  How exactly do I know that
I'm being washed over?  Can the hopelessness be pierced to see what is
actually expected or hoped for?  Hopelessness is blinding: there is
just the feeling of not getting what is desired without any clear
feeling of why the desire is there in the first place.

Engaging a state of depression does take a lot of courage.  It's also
not an instant fix; it takes time to peel the onion, and the first
layers are guaranteed to feel like crap.


Entry: Daniel on Powers
Date: Sun Mar 25 20:25:06 CEST 2012

Some interview with Ingram[1] and some discussin about powers[2].

[1] http://www.buddhistgeeks.com/2008/02/bg-061-buddhist-magic-what-is-possible-with-the-powers/
[2] http://www.dharmaoverground.org/web/guest/discussion/-/message_boards/message/517647


Entry: Curiosity
Date: Mon Mar 26 11:49:03 CEST 2012

Waking up, I want to go back to sleep.  My morning routine is to get
some coffee and maybe some bite to eat but please leave me alone and
let me wander around.  It's often almost impossible to imagine that I
take joy in thinking about something until it just happens.

Actually, I don't take joy in thinking.  Mental effort is painful.
It's only *finding* something that's joyful.  As long as the finding
happens with a high enough frequency, the process of continuing effort
can be sustained.

Let's dissect a bit more.  Easy problems are boring: finding a
solution isn't such a big deal as it's expected.  There is no reward,
only effort of kicking the brain into higher gear.  Sometimes just
getting to a certain kind of context can be the same effort for a
supposedly simple problem than for a difficult one.

Difficult problems are too painful: there is lots of processing
required that goes on in the background while consciousness is
drowning in confusion, loosing all hope there is ever going to be an
end to it.  It's said that confusion is good; an impetus for your
brain to work harder.  It feels like crap though.

Then there is the sweet spot in the middle: those kinds of problems
that can get you into a flow, where there is seemingly no effort.
Brain automatically latches on to them and starts hacking away.  In
these cases curiosity is always there.



Entry: Facing noon
Date: Mon Mar 26 13:47:55 CEST 2012

20 minute sit at noon, when it usually is quite difficult.  Started
with a lot of restlessness, moved through pain while sitting, changed
pillow then started to focus on the observer, the border between self
and world.  Observed 2 different states and a strange transition
between them.  Going from clear presence of self (in the form of
rumination, worry, disappointment with current state of affairs of the
daily life) to an absence of these things.  Crossing that border a
couple of times.

I'm going to call this state no-self as that's what it seems to be.
Not sure if it corresponds to what this usually refers to.  It feels
like a disinterest in rumination.  Simply not interested.

After about 15 minutes I had an insight, hard to describe, and writing
about it now probably fills in some gaps with story so I'm not going
to.  It was accompanied by a warm, radiating feeling from just below
my heart (center of chest where the rib case ends.  After that a jolt
of fear ("What's happening?") and a bit of disorientation.

It seems that actively looking for permanent self (that which is
supposed to be not there) seems to expose some of the elements it is
made out of, like thoughts of possession.  Wanting things a certain
way so they can be put in a special box called "me".

All of this is accompanied by a deep sense of relief, and a feeling
that I didn't do anything except for looking in a certain direction to
trigger a trap door.

When I'm writing this I wonder if I'm now totally deluding myself,
since this sounds so much like stories I've read before.  Though I did
not experience anything like a fruition, cessation.


EDIT: 30 minutes later the first signs of duality appear again, caused
by some aversion for a particular task and rumination.

EDIT: A couple of hours later.  After going into the real world for a
bit I was cast into duality and reactivity again pretty abrubtly.  My
mood is pretty good overall though.


Entry: Kenneth Folk @ buddhist geeks
Date: Tue Mar 27 11:18:23 CEST 2012

1st Gear: When things become difficult, switch to mindfulness of the body.
2nd Gear: Turn the attention to the watcher
3rd Gear: Recognize the essential nature of mind, this moment is perfect as it is.

Start in third gear and downshift.

2 Modes of the mind: experiential focus vs. narrative focus.

Following through to [1]: 2nd gear is looking at the no-dog.  The
trans-personal I.  The part of I that doesn't have a stake in whether
it lives or dies.

Then some more [3].  One of the observations Kenneth is mentionins
comes back over and over in dharma talks: allow the mind to see things
clearly by paying attention in a very directed way, pointed at the
next layer to peal off, and it will figure out how to let go of it; no
longer do the thing that causes suffering.  The process is automatic,
cannot be forced and follows directly and only from seeing clearly.

While this idea gets old, I find sometimes it needs to be restated in
different ways (by different people!) to bring the point home again.
It really is that simple.  The difficult part is knowing where to look
and distinguishing clear seeing from delusion and scripting.

Another thing Kenneth mentions in the [3] series is something he got
from his teacher Bill Hamilton: people expect a pot of gold when
attaining stream entry, but it's more like one has been picking up
gold coins all the way, and stream entry gives you an empty pot to put
them in, hold them together.


[1] http://kennethfolkdharma.com/2012/02/enlightenment-for-the-rest-of-us-the-buddhist-geeks-conference/
[2] http://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=player_embedded&v=wCV4MBuW3Y8#!
[3] http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gqYUNHrLFq0


Entry: Is meditation eliminating looping?
Date: Tue Mar 27 14:21:22 CEST 2012

When talking about formal languages (i.e. logic, mathematics) there is
always a problem when loops are involved.  What I find funny (as a
far-stretched analogy) is that this seems to be what is happening in
meditation: eliminating self-reference is what leads to happiness,
just like in math!

Maybe the idea that we know ourselves is keeping us from making
artificial intelligence.  Does an AI really need an I?  The answer is
probably no, just like we don't.  The I is mental virus that detests
itself (paraphrased from 5/6 in the series [1]).  Or Kenneth from [1]:
"This looping thing that the mind does where it tries to be subject
and object at the same time."

( Is "funny" just surprise at patterns that happen out of context? )

EDIT: Maybe this is actually a lot deeper than I first thought[2].  A
mind can't think about itself.  It can only think about an abstraction
of itself.  There is no cycle.

[1] http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gqYUNHrLFq0
[2] http://xkcd.com/1046/

Entry: Equanimity?
Date: Tue Mar 27 21:37:22 CEST 2012

Nice sit, 45 minutes.  Started out a bit tired and a lot of wandering
for 5 minutes, so I decided to go the concentration route first.  This
worked well.  After about 10 minutes I was in a very quiet state so I
turned attention to the current moment, then continued vipassana for
30 minutes.  Turned my attention to background fear and restlessness.

I ended up observing a mental construct consissting of fear of future
regret, which sounds a bit like insecurity, and a recognition of
patterns of active suppression of thoughts and feelings regarding fear
of possible undesirable future events.  Lots of content.  Then my
memory is failing me.  I remember trying to deconstruct this
architected mess of self-referencing and ending up at a dissipation
for the thoughts.  The loop in itself does not have a foothold, and
there was a point where all future unfolding seemed OK.

The insight is that thinking about future suffering ignores the fact
that the future will some day be the present, with a present being
that takes in that future now.  The realization that if I can live in
the current now, I can probably also live in the future now.  In this
view, fear of dying is quite absurd.  There is only fear of future
suffering before dying.  Fear of unsatisfactoriness that, given the
correct action now, might be avoided.  This whole construction
completely falls down once you start looking at its foundations.

When I finally settled down to look at the now, some waves of bliss
came over me that where at the same time very liberating (like letting
go and feeling the wind) and also subtly fearful.  It seems that I see
now more clearly a form of "holding on" that I didn't notice before.
Hard to identify what exactly it is.  From experience I know that if I
can actually see it, the mind will let go of it.  Those moments where
so empty of anything that it felt scary.  I actually felt like I was
letting go of something just to test the waters and then quickly
grasping it again.

During the sit I noted a lot of confusion.  Real actual confusion like
I experience it during work quite often: not being able to integrate
certain sensations and having to let them go.

I also realized that this is something that I usually identify with,
or anti-identify: confusion is not me, it's temporarily loss of
controll I'd like to sweep under the carpet.  It feels scary when I'm
identified with being clear.  Actually it's strange that I identify so
strongly with clarity while confusion is really my most prominent
state, even when working.

Maybe most of my procrastination is actually just fear of confusion?
Is confusion really that scary?

Confusion feels like floatig a boat on a turbulent stream.  Sometimes
head goes under and stuff falls off the boat.  It's a bit of a
hopeless situation: have to hang in there until it passes.


Entry: Procrastionation
Date: Tue Mar 27 22:01:59 CEST 2012

Is the avoidance that happens in procrastination just a means to cope
with fear of confusion?  Is confusion really that scary?  Thinking in
itself isn't such a big deal if it "goes as planned".  It can be quite
pleasant.  The trouble is probably more that thinking and problem
solving is really not so controllable as we might think it is.  There
is fear for the pain of confusion and the suffering it creates.  There
is fear for the pain and suffering created by forcing attention to
look at a certain detail while the storm of confusion is raging.


Entry: Blip
Date: Mon Apr  2 01:08:59 CEST 2012

30 minute sit.  Difficult.  Lots of distraction.  Last 10 minutes
where better after piercing through the chaos.  I went through pain,
concentration, noticed sadness (misery?) and confusion
(reobservation?).  Went to equanimity and fell back spiralling on
anticipation of stopping 3 minutes before end.  Then started
reading[2] and got very quiet and happy, fell back to jitteryness when
following up on an impulse, observed that feeling until it passed and
then read more.

I experienced a blip after reading the following from [1] and
focussing on awareness being aware of awareness happening:

    First. Imagine what it would be like to be dead (assuming no
    afterlife). Imagine what it would be like for there to be no
    experience happening at all.  Now - notice how there is an
    experience occurring. Also notice that it isn't happening for
    anyone in particular but is just a field of experience.  Notice
    that there is a knowing that there is an experience
    occurring. That the experience is bright and vivid and known.
    Part of this experience is the knowing that there is an experience
    occurring. In other words, awareness is aware of itself.  Let that
    really sink in.  Notice how there is no effort required to be
    aware.

It felt a bit like a sneeze.  A brain sneeze.. There was a buildup, a
little fear and an uncontrollable blip.  Feel calm and awake now.

[1] http://delicious.com/redirect?url=http%3A//kennethfolkdharma.wetpaint.com/thread/4780049/Recognizing%2Brigpa
[2] http://thehamiltonproject.blogspot.com/2011/10/yogi-experiment-riding-wave.html


Entry: Day after
Date: Mon Apr  2 21:23:41 CEST 2012

Feel a bit sick today.  Didn't sleep well yesterday.  Definitely some
duality today.  I did get over procrastination easier.  I don't really
feel like someting changed yesterday.  I felt another one of those
blips, a bit lesser, this morning.  Probably related to illness.


Entry: Still sick
Date: Tue Apr  3 11:58:20 CEST 2012

Didn't do sitting meditation.  Did practice laying in bed, observing
altered consciousness.  I feel frustration about life in general but
it hasn't taken me on a ride yet.  That seems to be a bit different.


Entry: Interpretation
Date: Thu Apr  5 09:32:20 CEST 2012

The question is of course whether the blip was a fruition or not.

First, I'm trying to follow advice and not worry about it too much.
It has become more clear to me that paying attention is what it is
about, not naming things.  There's always this defeating
interpretation that gets in the way of real insight.

Also, I'm still sick so have a bit of altered perception anyway, so I
try to take everything with a grain of salt.

Nontheless, some things have been different lately, say last 2 weeks,
with a little dip last friday.  One is a greater resilience to stress,
and not taking myself too serious or worrying about making mistakes at
work.  Friday I could see myself behaving reactionary, and not being
able to help it, but also not getting completely lost it in.  For the
rest I've been very much in the moment, not giving in to aversion so
much.

Yesterday's sit, 25 minutes.  Had to bail out because of pain in my
knee.  It's already a bit messed up so I'm not going to macho that
out..  First and last part where very quiet.  First part almost
asleep.  Maybe not really insight practice.  Middle part had some
confusion which then resolved into equanimity.

There is clarity, and hunting for the observer produces strange mind
states.  At times, I clearly see some "background me" as a
non-penetrated bunch of thoughts not clearly perceived as a succession
of sensations, more like a blob or a stream.  It's the me that wants
to do be done with this meditation already, sort of waiting it out to
do the wandering thing afterwards..

I.e. the "story of my life".  When I do see this, it drops away into a
more pure awareness, and almost always this comes with a little jolt
of fear and things flipping upside down.  Feels like fear to let go of
the very last foothold of that story of me.  The other side of that
feels wide open and beatiful, timeless.

So I think I've seen selflessness, but it's not a stable state.  It
comes and goes.  It might be a samatha jhana also.  I don't see it
clearly.



Entry: Please, please, distract me!
Date: Sat Apr  7 20:47:39 CEST 2012

Keeping on track with work mostly last couple of days, but today I got
distracted (and found many beautiful things, so it was worth it).
However it leaves me in a state of confion.  Actually I had to walk
out of the living room to be away from the TV, only to start link
chasing on the internet.  All better than going to the task at hand.

From being annoyed by this phenomenon for about - what... - my entire
life, I start to find it really interesting.  Also during meditation,
the "piercing" of aversion or avoidance behaviour tends to lead to
different states of awareness.  As if this piercings makes a weight
shift.  Things are different when you're able to let go of boredom.

Yes, boredom is just aversion, judgement.

There are so many things that are interesting when this tendency to
get bored can be switched of, or at least, be seen for what it is.
Maybe just like love/hate there is a state corresponding to
interest/boredom that sort of transcends the polarity and gives a
certain equanimity and space to it?


Entry: Yesterday's sit
Date: Sat Apr  7 20:54:26 CEST 2012

From memory... and mostly interpretation.

Ended in deep equanimity, before that pierced through confusion
(re-observation?) and I think one of the dark night trips like fear or
sadness.  Probably sadness.  Before that I had a narrow but calm state
and before that had to concentrate hard to get to some form of
effortlessness.

What I interpret there are some things that become more clear, which I
think is the difference between the transition from 3->4 (from the
three characteristics to the arising and passing away) and 10->11
(from reobservation to equanimity).

I think I saw both in one sitting.  The transition is similar: from
uncomfortable to comfortable, from forced conentration to
effortlessness, but in the former the focus is narow, while in the
latter is is very broad.  Even for reobservation, the confusion is
simply everywhere: everything is wrong!

So now the thing that becomes more difficult to answer: am I just
parroting MCTB?  Because this starts to look really a lot like things
Daniel describes.  Did I really see these things or am I solidifying
them?

Anyway, what struck me is the fractal nature: both 3->5 and 10->11 go
from chaos to order, but the extent of awareness is very different.



Entry: Relapse
Date: Sun Apr  8 21:28:43 CEST 2012

Experiencing a relapse.  Started around dinner tonight, after some
tension that didn't directly involve me but did install a certain mood
and aversion, desire..

Started feeling restless, out-of-sync.  A feeling of not understanding
what's going on.  Last 2 weeks where so quiet and happy.  I'm going to
face it in a 30 minute sit now.



Woa it starts to get hard to describe..  The fluff broke after 3.5
minutes on the cushon, then I started smiling.  Noticed my attachement
to the good feeling (I knew I could do it!) and moved on.  Got very
very deep.  Thoughts that started circling where "give up all desire
for attainment", "it's already there", ...  I noticed that I'm missing
some subtle line of self-story, some scripting, something that is
"doing" the meditation.  Looking at what that is makes it vanish
instantly making me a bit dizzy.  There are these very brief moments
of "it's just this" but they are rare, and they still go with a jolt
of fear and excitement, like "that's what I'm looking for!", "almost
there!".  Mostly there's some kind of loosing attention into just
being.  Hard to describe: there's a difference between looking at just
being, i.e. observing the "justness" and just being.  The former is
directed, the latter is free-floating but without vipassana
investigation.  So I try to come back to the investigation, as that's
supposed to make the most progress.



Entry: Reborn into the moment
Date: Sun Apr  8 23:35:46 CEST 2012

( Yes I know, sorry for the choice of words ;)

Pattern: doing something (usually reading), enjoying it, suddently I
get bored.  Bolt of aversion.  Intercept it, observe it, it fades away
into something I can only call confusion, some state of non-focus.
Then a moment later wake up, able to continue enjoyment.

This "moment of rebirth" is something I've never noticed before.  It's
the piercing through the aversion that seems to do this.  Seeing the
peak, and not letting it start a cascade.  It seems that my brain is
just not used to it.  It feels a bit like WTF just happened?

Hey dude, it's me, your self!  Comon, join the party, get excited and
all self-absorbed!  And then not going with this causes a deep "thunk"
and.. nothing :)

Kidding aside (yeah I feel jolly these days, and I find this really
funny -- wine probably helps a bit..) it's remarkable, and "rebirth"
is the only word I can find that best covers what it feels like.



Entry: Interesting HP posts
Date: Mon Apr  9 01:57:12 CEST 2012

Nick's SE post[1] is quite a funny read.  Following up to his noting
practice post [2] brings up some interesting points:

  Within a few months of taking up noting, I began to reach the 11th
  nana of Equanimity of Formations in my daily sits. In my sporadic
  practice over the next couple of years, I would consistently get up
  into this stage. One day I re-read Daniels chapter on the 11th
  nana. In it, he mentions the mind blinking out. This is where
  there are the sensations of self or I presenting themselves to
  awareness in between other objects coming in contact with any of the
  six the sense doors. The sensations being misread as "I" create the
  sense of duality and separation.

Yep, this corresponds pretty well to what I'm experiencing: blinking
out, and not seeing clearly.

  Daniel Ingram says in his book, One of the primary ways that the
  illusion of duality is maintained is that the mind partially blinks
  out for a part of each formation, the part it wants to section off
  to appear separate. In this way, there is insufficient clarity to
  see the interconnectedness and true nature of that part of reality,
  and a sense of a self is maintained. When the experience of
  formations arises, it comes out of a level of clarity that is so
  complete that this blinking can no longer easily occur. Thus, when
  formations become the dominant experience, even for short periods of
  time, very profound and liberating insight is close at hand. That is
  why there are systematic practices that train us to be very skilled
  in being aware of our whole mental and physical existence. The more
  we practice being aware of what happens, the less opportunities
  there are for blinking.

It now makes perfect sense.  I've read this chapter several times but
looks like I wasn't ready to understand this particular passage.


[1] http://thehamiltonproject.blogspot.com/2011/06/yogis-journal-from-chronic-dark-night.html
[2] http://thehamiltonproject.blogspot.com/2011/01/yogi-toolbox-noting-part-1-nicks.html


Entry: Three Characteristics
Date: Mon Apr  9 21:41:43 CEST 2012

1. anicca impermanence veranderlijk
2. dukkha suffering    pijnlijk
3. anatta no-self      kernloos



Entry: Equanimity & fallback
Date: Tue Apr 10 00:14:27 CEST 2012

I'm in equanimity (stage 11) most of the time these days.  Life really
is pretty damn good at this stage.  Had a wonderful time at the family
reunion.  Big gatherings like that usually make me at least a bit
nervous.  None of that today.  Everything went exceptionally smooth.
It felt different.  A lot of anxiety simply isn't there any more.

However, like described in everything I've read, the state isn't
stable.  I fell back about 20 minutes ago to a clear dukkha stage.
Ruminations, worry, blame, resentment, hello!  The obvious thing is
the narrowing of view, from broad, open, inclusive to small and
self-centered.

I'm going to follow Daniel's advice and keep practicing.  I think I
just observed a small shift to equanimity and back, just by
concentrating while writing this.  Maybe I've nailed that transition?
Stopped fearing it?  Acknowledged that the state I'm in is not under
my control, but that simply observing is the thing to do.  Without
judgement or attaching anything to the "bad" feelings.

The first hard emotion that hit was fear (of consequence of
negligence).  Not my own negligence so there was blame too, and
resentment.  Felt "wrong" after being in equanimity for a while.  A
state I remember all so well spending lots of time in it the last
couple of years.

Earlier I had a sit trying to go a bit deeper.  I'm reaching a creepy
part.  It's all starting to get pretty strange from here on.

Ok, on to the sit.



Interrupted the sit after 5 minutes.  Was hard to focus but after a
while I started finding the moment.  Once there I started looking for
what was different, what was the feeling, where was it?  It was
located at the top of my belly.  Then I started smiling, and space
opened up.  This transition was wonderful: from closed, self-centered
to wide open and broad.  It was (as it has been in the last couple of
days) accompanied by a feeling in my ears: some muscles are doing
something, nothing under my conscious control.



Entry: The maps
Date: Tue Apr 10 00:46:59 CEST 2012

It seems to me that the maps only start making sense after reaching
equanimity a couple of times.  I never really knew where I was but now
I feel pretty certain.

If I look back, the only things that were clear were:
 - 1. mind & body -> 2. cause & effect
 - 4. a & p: narrow, effortless concentration, bliss + event
 - 5 - 10: dukkha: major suckage, hard to concentrate and clinging to the feelgood states
 - 11: wide open equanimity

On my life in general, reaching cause & effect seems to have changed
something in the way I react to things, being more aware of the domino
effect.  The threshold of jumping on the wagon has gradually gotten
higher.  While in equanimity, it still happens, and whenever it
happens it seems to kick me back to dukkha.  Dark night (dukkha
stages) has effect too.  Makes the fuse shorter.  Equanimity has a
serious effect too.  Lots of openness.  And it's not the same as the
A&P brightness.  Equanimity is less self-obsessed.  This latter
property I didn't see described anywhere explicitly but for me it's
quite clear, since I usually am quite so..

Some other comments:

- There's indeed a difference between stage and state.  State is not
  long-lived.  Stage is maybe best described as a long-lived state?
  The stages are only clear to me in very coarse form: pre dark night,
  dark night, equanimity.  This corresponds a bit to the vipassana
  jhana classification and not the finer-grained njana.

- Reaching equanimity and able to stay in it for days it looks like
  dark night is real and seriously different.  I think I indeed spent
  a lot of time in that stage (10 years?) and probably did cross the
  A&P around that time, remember a feeling of fearlessness but also
  zeal and self-centeredness, strong attachment to story.  See earlier
  posts.  At this point I have no interest in self image or at least
  not nearly so much as before, and if I catch the habbit of
  self-profiling I'm annoyed by it.  I can also care less about what
  people think.  Though I do think that being confronted with some
  personal assault a fallback would probably put me back into a state
  of caring.  ( Speculation is still part of my un-observed self
  apparently ;)


So my point is that before equanimity it seems that the maps are not
so necessary.  As Daniel puts it in one of the Cheeta House videos: in
the dark night it's pretty obvious what to work on.  Indeed, it's all
right in your face and the challenge is to keep looking at it until
it's clearly observed and the next challenge presents itself.  Peeling
the onion.  In equanimity it's not obvious and you do need some
guidance.  Something is hiding in plain sight, and a bit of guidance
seems to be necessary here.



Entry: Back in reobservation?
Date: Tue Apr 10 11:53:08 CEST 2012

I think I woke up in reobservation today.  Lots of resentment.  It's
not carrying me away so much but it's definitely there.  Out-of-sync
with things.

EDIT: I don't think it's reobservation, at least not now (13:00).
Maybe it was.  It's more the intensity.

Yesterday I had a couple of dips or blackouts during reclining
meditation, and some pretty strange visual images - reminding me of
drawings I've seen from people on LSD, strange and distorted
caricatures of faces and animals, and they were all looking at me, as
if they suddenly noticed me (a bit like that lizards scene in Fear
And Loathing In Las Vegas ;)

So I'm wondering if these are fruitions.  I didn't have experiences
like this before.  They are new from the last week or so (see [1]).

I had 3 of them in a row, a couple of seconds apart.  The last one I
remember to truly go "dark".  As for afterglow, I don't know.  It left
me a bit confused, as in "was that it?".  After it occured I don't
notice much difference from deep equanimity.  I was tired and a bit in
a weird state (see visual hallucinations above).

Oh, there was a certain fear I seemed to have pierced through by
bravely watching it, which gave a small bliss wave after it dissolved.
No need to go into detail, something that pops up from time to time.

So I don't know if I'm scripting, but everything feels quite intense,
which I recall being another property.

EDIT: Maybe it is (15:15).  I'm very restless atm.

EDIT: Later (23:30), after doing some work, I got irritated a bit
after some communication issues.  Took me on a roll, briefly.
Interrupted my sit.  Should probably go back.

[1] entry://20120402-010859



Entry: Snapping out of it
Date: Mon Apr 16 07:45:20 EDT 2012

It starts to get more systematic to get out of a state which I'll
label "self-pity".  I do still need solitude to do this; there remains
a strong correlation between contraction (re-inforcing of
separateness) and being among people, essentially not getting what I
want, or being confronted with opinions that evoke some reaction.

What has become more clear over the last couple of weeks is the
"blinking" mentioned in [1], meaning that I can see it happen after
the fact, and sometimes can see it happening in real-time.

For aversion this blinking seems to be quite strong: the sensations
that follow aversion seem to re-enforce a mental tape loop about why
something is "wrong".  This is hard to explain..  Just like non-self
thoughts where hard to see in the past, the self thoughts are even
harder to see.  Their interruption of noting activity is very subtle.
When they are actually intercepted, preventing interruption of noting,
they indeed create a broad feeling of freedom which I can describe as
"obviously not interested in this kind of empty rumination" or "this
is obviously fluff".

Practically I'm getting caught by aversion towards having to perform
urgent work to meet a deadline.  The work in itself is actually quite
interesting, and it seems that the aversion is more directed towards
the difficulty of the task; it requires a lot of mental effort.  I'm
recovering from jet-lag, feeling tired, so performing any form of
mental activity is a bit painful.  At least to the point where I
actually wake up enough, get activated enough, such that the process
starts guiding itself.

All in all, intercepting the blinking is a very strange experience.  A
lot has changed in my perception of things over the past months, but
this tendency to re-inforce the self is still there, hiding in plain
sight.

It starts to make sense now that "self is empty".  It's still a bit
scary though, especially in moments where that self provides a strong
reference point to hold on to.  I realize that letting go of this is a
key point.  And that indeed it needs practice.  Paying attention lets
you take a glimpse, then next time you know where to look and see
more, and so bit by bit attention gets more directed.

Subtle stuff :)

[1] entry://20120409-015712



Entry: The Watcher
Date: Wed Apr 18 20:34:30 EDT 2012

I found an experience that clearly triggers a sense of self: to sit
upstairs, looking out the window, creates a feeling of out-there
(them, the world) and in-here (me, not in the world).

I played with it a bit this morning, going from focusing on my
experience of being in the room, where that feeling is much more
subtle, to watching out the window, feeling "me" pop up.

That deserves further investigation.



Entry: Integration
Date: Thu Apr 19 10:46:08 EDT 2012

Integration is hard.  Back to life again after 5 weeks of quiet, and
launched right into the habitual reaction patterns.

It feels odd now getting angry, as if it's glaringly obvious that I'm
missing something, but can't see what.  As if I'm wielding an axe at
an imaginary fiend.

Without going into details, yesterday and today had some build-up of
old stuff.  Looking at it now after calming down, it is indeed quite
obvious what these patterns are: attachments to "how it should be",
"it's all so simple if you just listen to me", attachment to approval
for fulfilling wishes, and to not being in conflict.

From what I read yesterday (Florian's thread on psychopaths[1]) it's
starting to get through to me that compassion and the cultivation of
it is more essential than I first thought.  Just insight is useless
without an actual connection to the world.  I should listen to Dan..

EDIT: It got worse.  I'm not really aware of what it is that I want
and am not getting, or that I get and do not want.  Maybe it's more of
the latter...  I'm pretty good as I am, don't want more, but neither
do i want THAT...  I seem to be much more challenged by aversion than
by desire.  Why is that?  Both are two sides of the same coin.  Why is
one side so strong?

In other words, it's doable to watch things arise and pass when life
is fun and games, but quite a challenge with much more provocation
around.  It doesn't even need conscious provocation, just presence of
situation that triggers a kind of judgement or separation.

[1] http://dharmaoverground.org/web/guest/discussion/-/message_boards/message/2974740



Entry: Dukkha
Date: Fri Apr 20 10:35:20 EDT 2012

Dissatisfaction, back in the dark night it seems.

I'm going for a sit in a bit, but I can say that at this point my
general state is "not OK".  Things are clearly not how I want them to
be.  I'm resisting strongly my current situation.  (Stuff: Some work I
promised to finish that's not taking me into flow; is taking me into
resentment instead.)  I somehow "know" this is fluff, but I don't
"see" it: it has bite.

[1] http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dukkha


Entry: Sneezes
Date: Fri Apr 20 10:44:07 EDT 2012

The "mental sneezes" keep happening.  I'm starting to really wonder
what they are.  I don't think they are fruitions, since there is no
sense of completion.  Yesterday I went from suffering to letting go at
some point and that's when one of these things happened again.  Two
days ago the same.  It feels like something is about to happen, just
like a sneeze coming op, followed by a muscular contraction (eyes,
face, neck, sholders).  Not very pleasant and kind of freaky.  They
don't really feel like a discontinuity either: things are pretty much
like before, though it does interrupt things: the experience of the
sneeze itself is like an ordinary sneeze: an uncontrollable
contraction, a bit painful, followed by a relief of the tension from
the buildup.

This could also match A&P events, but so many?  Why didn't I get them
before?

Unlikely, but if they are fruitions then it means I'm cycling, which
could explain some of the ups & downs.  I went from very unhappy to
smiling contently about 10 minutes ago.


Entry: Later, a shift.
Date: Fri Apr 20 12:43:30 EDT 2012

Had a nice sit.  Mostly equanimous but with a bit of background
radiation: some queasy feeling in my solar plexus.  I can't remember
if anything happened, but I did feel a lot less restless.

After sitting, some shift happened when reading "Saints and
Psychopaths" by Bill Hamilton[1].  (There are other places to find
it.  Amazon price is a bit over the top.)

Basically, I started laughing, right after a small interception of
resentment and me talking out loud to myself, immediately followed by
seeing the lack of substance of that sensation, where it shifted to
the side and a deep sense of happiness and joy emerged.  The idea of
"getting the divine joke" emerged, as I heard explain somewhere on
DhO.

Very similar to the shift that happened in Belgium a couple of weeks
ago.  I'm assuming it's the dukkha njanas to equanimity shift.

I guess the next thing to do is to look at this happiness and freedom,
since it is easy to get attached to it.



This morning I felt off (see previous post) but I had this idea in my
head that I should not panic, and that I should not give into the
torrent.  This worked.  Looking at the situation more clearly exposed
some feelings of sadness, mostly sadness about not seeing that I was
clinging.  Sadness about hurting myself by not noticing the hanging
on..

[1] http://www.amazon.com/Saints-Psychopaths-William-L-Hamilton/dp/0964490404




Entry: Weird..
Date: Sat Apr 21 21:11:23 EDT 2012

Strange sit.  Very deep concentration.  Started staring into some kind
of void at some point.  Blissfull with a lot of fear/anticipation.
Some desire for attainment, some "yeah you're getting there".  Hard to
not be captured by it.  I tried to keep noting and much of what I saw
only existed for an instant.  Sensations I can't describe well.  Like
bubbles of something.  Lot's of things that triggered the thought "I
won't be able to capture all this in words later.."

What permeates the whole experience was a sensation of beauty.  Deep
and all encompassing beauty.


Entry: Dukkha
Date: Mon Apr 23 19:48:30 EDT 2012

Anger, hate, sadness, disgust, strong aversion, (near) inability to
see the background of "todo, after meditating".

Might be work today, which was a bit of a hell.  Lots of aversion.



Entry: DhO stuff
Date: Mon Apr 23 22:03:29 EDT 2012

From [1]:

  If all goes well this will happen effortlessly and your whole field
  of reality will start to feel wobbly. The first couple of times you
  will get excited and it wont go through. But eventually you should
  get stream entry.

  ...

  And I would try to observe the observer with a high frequency of
  noting. The process of observing the sensations allowed them to be
  seen as not me, not 'the observer'.


I think I've experienced this "wobbly" part, and also the excitement
that makes it go away again.

For me it works a bit different.  Watch watch.. until there is a
sensation of watcher, always in the past as it always takes front
stage, then try to backtrack in memory and fading sensations and try
to see where that came from.  The "echo of the ego" or something.



[1] http://dharmaoverground.org/web/guest/discussion/-/message_boards/message/2963820


Entry: Transition to equanimity
Date: Mon Apr 23 22:14:47 EDT 2012

It seems that zooming in to the background doesn't really work until
one is actually stable in Equanimity.  If there is any non-noticed
unsatisfactoryness left over from the dukkha stage, the space will not
open up.

If there's "stuff", it needs to be identified and let go of first.


Entry: Deep
Date: Wed Apr 25 13:20:06 EDT 2012

Yesterday I had another sit full of new experiences.  Started out with
some lingering daily life frustration, there was a transition into
(probably) equanimity while the "bad" feelings where still in the
background.  This was new.  I was able to follow the physical
sensations associated with basically anger for a couple of minutes.

What was new was that these "bad" feelings where OK, and actually
beautiful in themselves.  Quite a strange experience!

After the "bad" feelings disappeared, a deep sense of stillness and
peace arose.  Very very deep.  I tried to observe this peace and also
using a "how do I know it's peaceful/still/.." method and something
seemed to shift.  Then I got greedy, spinning a story of attainment
and the whole thing sort of collapsed.



Interpretation: seems that "bad" sensations that are not necessarily
caused by the meditation itself don't necessarily go away after
observing and acknowledging them.  Makes me think of the idea
mentioned by Daniel on DhO that there's some biological limit to how
fast emotions can pass through your system.


Entry: Sensation and mental representation
Date: Wed Apr 25 13:35:40 EDT 2012

Yesterday's experience has shed a new light on the issue of
experiencing physical sensation vs. mental impression.

More concretely, in the equanimous/peaceful/wide-open state it is
easer to see the sensations of anger (butterflies, muscular
contraction mostly centered around stomach, and muscular "readyness"
over the whole body) and the mental impression ("I am angry"), in the
sense that the latter didn't really arise, or at least not that
strongly or only in the form of subtle noting.

Anger is quite interesting, isn't it?  Because it's so mobilizing, it
can be quite a surprise to find yourself being angry, noticing it -
breaking the cycle while being pumped up, and having the anger
deflate.  Anger by itself relies very much on bying into it, feeding
it.  Not feeding it feels awkward in the come-down, but powerful after
that, i.e. when regaining control.


Entry: De-focusing
Date: Wed Apr 25 19:57:30 EDT 2012

I like Nikolai's writing style[1].  Follow pointers, there are a lot
of interesting articles linked.

[1] http://thehamiltonproject.blogspot.com/2012/04/yogi-experiment-when-in-midst-of-misery.html


Entry: Another interesting sit
Date: Thu Apr 26 16:50:29 EDT 2012

From memory, yesterday night.  This time it's hard to separate
phenomenology from story, because I started out thinking I was in A&P
because of calm, confident mood, thinking that I would need to wade
through the dark night stages to get into equanimity.  And this is
exactly what happened:

Started confident OK, effortless sitting (A&P).  Things starting to
fall apart, only able to see the end of things, like trying to grab a
fish in a bucket and it slipping from your hands (Dissolution).  Then
the realisation "next comes fear" and yep, it arrived.  Immediately
followed by misery.  I think I felt some disgust too, and it was
linked to something from my daily life, not necessarily practice.  And
after a bit of mixup of those (re-observation) I landed in Equanimity:
wide open space.  Followed up by observing the back of my head and
some other suggestions from Nikolai's posts on THP.

Awareness during the day goes deeper these days.  Especially the
morning resentment is more easily pierced, moving from "woe me" to
observing sensations more quickly after getting up.



Entry: Mindfulness
Date: Thu Apr 26 21:02:27 EDT 2012

It's starting to get a bit freaky.  During the day I have several
moments of snapping into a state of quite pure self-observation.  I'm
feeling a lot of equanimity and de-sticking.

Things still get to me from time to time.  Resentment towards work and
smaller perceived "theft of freedom" is still able to seriously get me
on a roll, until I notice that I'm rolling.  Feels like getting caught
with my pants down.  There's this brief moment of shame of bying into
the cycle.  Snapping out of it feels nice though.


Entry: Restlessness
Date: Fri Apr 27 13:43:22 EDT 2012

Yesterday's sitting and following reclining meditation where filled
with restlessness.  It was quite strong and unpleasant.  After it I
could not get to sleep, so I practiced some more, reclining.  At some
point there was a transition to equanimity.  I tried to remember how
exactly it happened but I remember not being able to.  I think a
combination of going back to "now" and especially noting resistance
and letting go eventually lead to a transition.  After that I fell
asleep.

Feel good an light today.


Entry: Sitting through confusion without blinking
Date: Fri Apr 27 14:54:50 EDT 2012

One experience that has been with me for a couple of weeks is the
ability to note the sensation of confusion and not be carried away by
it.  Before I would get confused and basically resent that, and go on
a self-pity trip, or on a forceful resisting, trying to focus hard on
specific things that cause the confusion.

Now it's possible to just ride the wave.  Confusion feels like a ball
in the center of perception.  It's visual representation is a like a
glowing ball of twine.  It decays over a couple of seconds.  Not
resisting the initial unpleasantness causes a light feeling of bliss
and freedom when it is fading.



Entry: Bliss
Date: Mon Apr 30 12:54:06 EDT 2012

Very blissful half-reclining sit yesterday, after a moment of
suffering.  Images suffering from a movie about WWII kept coming up
(Sarah's Key).

I tried to get to noting but I was getting very attached to the bliss.
Maybe I hit a different concentration Jhana?  I don't know much about
this so I'm not going to speculate.

After the sit I did full reclining on the bed.  Dozed off at some
point and woke up with pure sensation.  There was some blip/shock
which might have just been me dozing off..  I felt different
afterwards, but I'm getting quite weary of suggestion here since I
seem to be quite good at feeling different after having some kind of
blip ;)

So I don't know, let's see what happens.  No hurry.  Feel good in
general.

I also am very aware of sensations in the top part of my nose and into
the corners of my eyes.  Maybe these were associated to self before
and tuned out?  It's weird, it's always there.

I had the same happen with a sensation in the back, top of my head.  I
can't feel it now, but it was very prominent.


Entry: Confusion
Date: Tue May  1 12:45:23 EDT 2012

Why is confusion so unconfortable?

I can work for hours as long as I stay in flow, but when I hit
confusion and have to actively step out of the box, two hours can mess
me up for the whole day.  Why does it take so much energy?

I'm thinking that the suffering is really about not wanting to be
confused, not wanting to feel that confrontation with not being in
control.  Does the exhaustion then come from the aversion (reaction),
or just simply from the sensation of being confused?



Entry: Different again
Date: Wed May  2 13:43:18 EDT 2012

Hard to distinguish what actually happened from re-interpretation
after the fact.  It was a lot and it seems best to give in to putting
it on the path:

- 3 characteristics: uneasyness, first confused with dark night
- A & P: wonderfull bliss, very narrow focus
- dark night: dissolution, fear, sadness, confusion (re-observation?)
- equanimity: definitely different from A & P, though also blisfull but with wide focus and space.
- one of those "blips" I described before. didn't notice anything different after the blip.

Life in general goes smoothly.  I'm a bit detached from things,
equanimous.  Letting things fade out before reacting.  Not getting
provoked so easily, and when I do get angry it fades quickly without
doing damage.

There's definitely something different.  I'm starting to think that
maybe I got SE.  I don't feel I "gained" anything, but that I lost
things: lost being worked up all the time.  From what I've read that
might be a sign.  Let's see where it goes, time will tell.  Another
sign is supposed to feel that something is done.  Well, I feel as if
something is no longer a problem.  Not so much obsessed with the idea
of getting SE.



Entry: Resentment & fear
Date: Thu May  3 10:36:20 EDT 2012

Not getting anywhere today.  Got some task tension coupled to
resentment and fear and I can't seem to pierce through that.

Was reading some of Nick's HP posts [1][2][3].

Maybe it's time to use this opportunity of misery and serious woe-me
selfing to get some insight.  First, I'm trying to describe how it
feels.

Something's not right.  Thoughts come up (shopping list, TODO stuff,
resentment) in a way that hasn't happened for a while.  So let's
assume I'm starting at ground zero again.

I try to concentrate on sensations, but concentration gets interrupted
by thoughts and sensation that are not noted.  This makes me get
frustrated.  "I've been through all this before, and really I just
want equanimity so I can continue my meditation work."

What seems to happen here is that instead of actually doing insight
practice, I'm thinking/simulating it.  That just went from verbal to
knowing and things change immediately.  So I guess I just need to
start noting again.  Reclining this time.  Sitting was too painful,
distracting.





[1] http://thehamiltonproject.blogspot.com/2012/04/yogi-experiment-when-in-midst-of-misery.html
[2] http://thehamiltonproject.blogspot.com/2011/10/yogi-experiment-riding-wave.html
[3] http://thehamiltonproject.blogspot.com.au/2012/04/yogi-experiment-peripherycentre.html



Entry: When in the midst of misery
Date: Fri May  4 12:48:32 EDT 2012

Looking into [1] again because of a recent "woe, is me" attack.  When
I'm in a quiet spot, meditation tends to progress fine; I'm seeing
more and more of the self-sensations, creating momentary "necker cube
flips".

However, real life tends to interfere.  Especially getting into trips
of resentment, basically people wanting me to do things against my
natural flow, creating this carefully constructed feedback loop
between pride and guilt.

This also makes me think that I don't have SE (as I started to
speculate earlier) because these tape loops do have sticking power.


Anyways.  Reading [1] I came to this, which din't parse correctly:

  There is a movement of mind to grasp at the resolution of a desire
  born of an evaluation of something that has arisen within the field
  of experience.

(causes a buffer overflow on the receiving end ;)  Taking it apart:

   sensation in field of experience
-> evaluation of sensation  (i.e. good/bad)
-> desire from evaluation (i.e. want/resent)
-> grasp at resolution of desire (i.e. want the want/resent solved)

  ... Sensations will arise as a result. They may then manifest as
  'tense' unpleasantness which act as a trigger for thoughts, images
  and ideas about 'self' and how 'self' relates to those thoughts,
  images, ideas, and an onslaught of unpleasant 'self-narratives' will
  ensue and continue a viscous cycle of woe, is 'me'.

-> tense/unpleasant sensations caused by the grasping
-> these trigger selfing
-> selfing triggers more selfing



Maybe I've come full circle.  I started meditating to be able to
handle these woe-is-me trips and their associated cycles of suffering.
It's more clear now that indeed, these trips are self-inflicted, and
firmly rooted in habitual patterns that can be broken by awareness.
As long as I'm not plagued by them directly, the awareness works well.
I've significantly raised the threshold of getting caught, but there
are those that would have gotten me good before I started practicing,
that still get me.  And with that comes a feeling of disappointment.
I can feel something has changed, but it's not "good enough" yet,
which is more oil on the selfing fire..


[1] http://thehamiltonproject.blogspot.com/2012/04/yogi-experiment-when-in-midst-of-misery.html




Entry: Hacking vedana
Date: Fri May  4 13:50:04 EDT 2012

I saw a brief glimpse of this[1] one time[2].  Seeing a normally quite
negative, unpleasant sensation as beautiful.

[1] http://thehamiltonproject.blogspot.com.au/2011/09/yogi-experiment-hacking-vedana.html
[2] entry://20120425-132006



Entry: Equanimity again
Date: Sat May  5 10:47:44 EDT 2012

Day was full of suffering.  Much dukkha, much selfing.  To a point
where it gets to be embarrassing: like I know cognitively on one hand
that I'm feeding the loop, though on the other hand I don't "see" how
to stop it until the intensity falls below a certain threshold, then I
immediately become equanimous and happy.

Did some reclining meditation yesterday night.  Wide open equanimity.
Investigating the watcher.  Flipping between sensation-view and
me-view.  The latter arises automatically again when concentration is
broken.  It looks like it's easier to see now when watcher is there.

Also, I've been trying to notice attachment to the open space that had
been creeping up.  Hard to describe, but it's a transition from narrow
to broad that feels really good.  Maybe it's a jhana transition?
Solidifying? I've been looking for it then clinging to it and now
realized that sensation and let it go.  Things open up more after
that.  Experiencing wide open, clarity without the "wow, cool"
reaction.




Entry: The "You" *is* the fighting
Date: Sat May  5 18:46:45 EDT 2012

[1] http://thehamiltonproject.blogspot.com/2011/09/yogi-experiment-stop-fighting.html
[2] http://thehamiltonproject.blogspot.com/2011/09/yogi-toolbox-refining-and-discerning.html


Entry: Last couple of sits
Date: Sat May 12 18:24:53 EDT 2012

I'm starting to see the progressing more clearly:
- acces concentration
- A&P
- dukkha
- Equanimity

Then, when in equanimity and focusing on the watcher I get "mental
sneezes" quite consistently, so I'm wondering again if these are
fruitions.  In general, I feel pretty good afterwards.  Most of the
times this is right before going to bed, but when I do practice during
the day and there isn't too much stuff going on to suck me back into
life, the same pattern unfolds.

Another thing is that even with stuff going on, the following approach
seems to be quite repeatable:

- Just sit down and get to the point where it becomes "natural" to
  concentrate.  This can include some discursive thought that's hard
  to catch, but letting it arise gives a refresh of the experiential
  memory of how it is to let this go.  ( Mind & Body ?)

- Once realization is there that concentration might be a good thing,
  start with samatha practice, building up tranquility.

- Once tranquil, start insight practice, focusing on "selfing".

The samatha seems to give a shortcut to the stage of Equanimity, which
seems to be necessary to start observing the watcher.  Before that, it
doesn't make much sense as there is too much inclination to focus on
details.  Watching the watcher at least needs a broad perspective,
all-in "formations" ?


Entry: Taking things personal
Date: Mon May  7 21:33:15 EDT 2012

I like humor.  And especially satire.  However, being the target of
satire is something that has surprised me on a couple of occasions as
a blow in the stomach.  Howeverm, it can be liberating, having your
ignorance or identification exposed by witty comments.

Maybe I should make a list ;)

- South park
- Margaret Cho
- Paul Mooney



Entry: Wondering ..
Date: Sun May 13 00:48:29 EDT 2012

.. if this[1] was my 1st path moment.  I keep having these mental
sneezes and things feel pretty good overall.  Very "normal" with some
very bright (concentration) moments during the day that pop out of
nowhere.  I also think I'm cycling.  Some weight has definitely lifted
and emotion trips don't stick around for too long (though some people
still get on my nerves ;)

[1] entry://20120326-134755



Entry: Sneeze
Date: Tue May 15 20:55:21 EDT 2012

Sneeze again after focusing on suffering caused by attachment to work
stuff.  Tried to look at if things where different after it and yes,
the suffering was gone.  Had a 20min sit after that which went from
what I think was A&P into deep equanimity.  No more sneezes after
that.  Tried laying down as I was experiencing pain but fell asleep
for 15 minutes.  Feel very calm and relaxed after that, with a bit of
lingering sadness for going into a work-related attachment and
resentment trip again today and yesterday.



Entry: Couple of bad days.
Date: Thu May 17 19:46:56 EDT 2012

Mostly caused by unrealistic expectations, and holding on to them
dearly..  It has become so clear to me that happiness really lies in
the letting go of things.  The question then is, where do we place
passion?  Is there any room for it, or is it just to be done away
with?

Today I started working on something that's supposed to be fun,
i.e. it is a "hobby".  Though it got side-tracked a bit by wanting it
to be something different than it was.  By a lot of resistance to
accepting reality as it is.

Tss... Feeling pretty crappy right now.  Maybe time to sit.



Entry: Yesterday
Date: Fri May 18 11:16:10 EDT 2012

Before sitting around midnight, 30 minutes, I was quite on edge.  Even
when it's no big deal to feel bad these days (which is an awesome
develepment btw.) there is plenty of unsatisfactoriness going on.

I went the samatha route.  Not sure where I got, maybe 2nd jhana as I
think there is at least some effortlessness going on.  After that I
eventually ended up in equanimity.  The "investigation" feels really
more natural than abiding in the bliss.

Self dissolved at some point.  I'll try to explain the experience.  I
was looking out the window at the garage.  Doing so there was no
sensation of observer, however focusing on the curtains through which
I was looking created a clear sense of "me sitting in the room
watching outside".  I kept focusing on those sensations until they got
re-interpreted as just sensations.  No trace of me, just sensations.
Accompanied by a great sense of relief and equanimity and a clear
seeing of the absence of suffering caused by this disappearing of the
out-there / in-here distinction.

After the sit, the sense of self returned when I went to bed.

Main feature of the sit: clear feeling of non-separation /
selflessness.  This has been quite reproducable lately.  That feeling
itself changes.  My fear towards it does no longer kick me out of it.

On to interpretation.  Did I reach SE?  Am I now cycling?  How can
this experience of non-separation be so clear and at the same time not
be permanent?  I've plenty of separation-based behaviour and story
going on during the day.  I end up in unsatisfactoryness and with
almost no exception I can then sit for 15-30 minutes and end up in
equanimity feeling very good after that.

It seems obvious that I need to continue doing this, trying to note
more in the process.  Noting really is quite a powerful technique.  It
seems to make it easier to come back to a central point instead of
getting carried away without focus.  It keeps the attention "switched
on".



Entry: Last week
Date: Tue May 29 11:37:21 EDT 2012

Lot's of things happening after last entry.  Knowing that I have SE or
not is becoming less important.  Every time I talk about this to my
wife, the concept seems "empty ego stuff", just words, and I can
clearly see how it is just one of those loopy things that keep the
suffering going.

However, in my experience I've been seeing the shift to "self dropping
out of the picture" a number of times.  Dark night stuff isn't so much
of an issue.  In fact there are some disturbing things in my life at
this time that seem to be met with a lot of equanimity and little
story looping.  The looping and associated emotions do pop up but it
is always clear that this is what is going on.  It moved from being
"me" to becoming an annoying pattern.  ( "Noisy neighbours", following
Florian's terminology. )

In my meditation I've been trying to go through the Samatha Jhanas and
moving to Vipassana when it feels right.  This almost always leads to
a "self dropping out" experience.  Not sure if it's a fruition or some
other near-enemy shift but the shift itself is becoming more clear and
more easily reproducable.

I'm starting to see more clearly the first 4 Jhanas, and I think I
might have touched on the 5th or further but it's not clear from the
properties.  I can clearly see these transitions though:

- A -> 1: good feeling appears, sustained concentration necessary
- 1 -> 2: sustained concentration no longer necessary
- 2 -> 3: physical part of good feeling disappears, less conscious of body
- 3 -> 4: mental part of good feeling disappears, makes room for equanimity and openness

At 4th Jhana it becomes easier to go to Vipassana by starting
ivestigation.  The "self" processes are more visible that way.  It's
hard to do this using a dry approach.  This cuts both ways: I'm having
trouble not investigating getting to 4th.  Inertia?

After 4th that there is at time a transition where things turn black,
as if space disappears.  I'm still there though.  Other than that I
don't see clearly enough to match it to the Jhana descriptions.

About [1], it seems to have a samatha-vipassana pingpong thing going
on: pure concentration to make the initial jump into samatha, then
investigation to get to the bottom of the "tension" sensations, then
moving back to pure concentration, letting go of investigation.

[1] http://thehamiltonproject.blogspot.com/2011/01/yogi-tool-box-letting-go-approach-to.html


Entry: Diagnosis
Date: Thu May 31 12:26:00 EDT 2012

According to Nikolai I have hit 1st path.  According to him the
experience of self falling away while being conscious is the key
point, not so much the occurance of fruitions.

For the record, these two events happened for me first time on self
dropping out [1] and a week later the blipping[2].

[1] http://localhost:8181/ramblings.ss/dharma/20120326-134755
[2] http://localhost:8181/ramblings.ss/dharma/20120402-010859



Entry: Resentment
Date: Thu May 31 16:39:53 EDT 2012

According to Nikolai, reactiveness is not related to 1st path.

The experience of self dropping away and leaving only pure awareness
and a deep feeling of peace has been reproducable in sits, and it has
been happening on occasions in ordinary life.

However, I do get quite worked up during the day.  Mornings filled
with work stress are especially bad, like this morning.  Just now I
had an experience of the "overlay" disappearing where it all seemed
quite irrelevant.

It feels like all this self "fluff" becomes quite meaningless, and
quite obviously so, without a single doubt left.  However, dropping
out of this experience (state?) brings back all the suffering, and I
find it very hard to step out of this cycle while working, doing
something against my immediate motivation, i.e. something boring that
requires a lot of mental effort.


Entry: Onward
Date: Sat Jun  2 20:45:40 EDT 2012

After the exchange with Nikolai some story started to build about
"having" first path, which reminds me a bit of the zeal jolt I got
after about a month of starting daily practice, probably after A&P.  I
guess it's time to move on and deconceptualize this.  Practice has
been slacking these past couple of days.

I understand now a bit the reluctance to talk about attainments in Zen
tradition.  Any conceptualization is not realization, that is very
very clear now, and there is both a strong pull towards
conceptualization and talking about this, but at the same time a
feeling that restraint is in order, and the real thing (the practice)
is more important than the abstraction of it.



Entry: No self vs. blipping
Date: Sat Jun  2 21:11:37 EDT 2012

I'm experiencing two things these days: self dropping out, and
blipping/sneezing.  Both are distinctively different.  The blipping
seems rather ordinary.  I can feel one come up with a little tension,
which is released after the blip.  My eyes close with face muscles
contracting, just like with a real sneeze.

Experience after the event is not much different than before, apart
from this build-up tension being gone.  Self is still there, including
some background tensions.  These happen quite often, mostly in respons
to some kind of concentration in daily life, or when I find myself in
a calm state and focus on something.

The no-self experience is more profound, and harder to provoke.  It
seems to require a deeper state of concentration: if there is any
tension I'm not aware of, it will not happen.  Once all the tension is
clearly seen and concentration is wide for a minute or so, it seems to
happen rather automatically.  Getting to this level of concentration
is not trivial, and I've only managed to do this at night when it's
really quiet.  It is easier than it was in past weeks: it seems I know
what I'm looking for now.

What I do experience in daily life is "near miss" events of seeing
no-self, in response to trying to provoke such an event.  I can feel
some of the build up that I recognize from a full event, but it
doesn't pop, and I'm left with a feeling of being out-of-sync.

In the case it does pop, all tension disappears, making room for a
deep and profound feeling of equanimity.


Entry: Frame rate
Date: Sun Jun  3 10:15:20 EDT 2012

I think I'm starting to experience the discrete "frame rate" of
awareness that I've seen mentioned on the DhO.  It just happened while
replying to an email.  This feels really strange.  My first reaction
to it is that there is something wrong with my perception.  It feels
as if I'm going crazy.  It's abit scary.  Alien.



Entry: HP posts on MCTB vs. other
Date: Mon Jun  4 23:28:27 EDT 2012

From recent exchange with Nikolai I'm looking for some more
information about MCTB 4th path not being the "real deal".

This is from Nick's practice log[1].

  I came across this explanation of the "blips" (anonymous yogi)
  experiences. This is the best explanation of what I have been calling
  fruitions I have come across. Awesome!  

    "The first is a momentary discontinuity, a blip in awareness. It
    is preceded by what feels like a build up of charge between two
    capacitor plates somewhere in the head (behind the eyes, forward
    of the pineal gland, about where the pituitary gland is
    located). There is also the sense of a physical flexing of some
    structure in the same location. When the charge builds up to a
    certain threshold, there is a very quick (milliseconds) discharge
    of energy during which consciousness winks out. After the
    discharge, there is the sense of the same structure relaxing."


That seems to be pretty accurate.  For me the physical part is really
more like a real sneeze.  I can't keep my eyes open, and I seem to
automatically add some drama to it, like shaking my head or flexing
muscles in my neck and shoulders.


[1] http://thehamiltonproject.blogspot.com/2011/06/yogis-journal-from-1st-to-4th-path.html


Entry: Practice and non-practice
Date: Mon Jun  4 23:49:37 EDT 2012

Experiencing more of this no-self state, and feeling disorientation.
Trying not to go too much into story.  Trying to be aware of
fabrication.  Lots of blips/sneezes.  They start to become annoying.
Feeling some aversion to being cast into this strange state of being.
Trying to be aware of that aversion.  Experiencing a form of mourning
for having lost something.  A general state of WTF, what now?


Entry: Frame rate of awareness?
Date: Thu Jun  7 14:10:16 EDT 2012

There's something special about this 4Hz rate.  I can see it clearly
in my visual field from time to time, especially after drinking coffee
or eating sweet food.

Does this have to do with the boundary of Delta[2] waves 0-4Hz and
Theta[3] waves 4-7Hz?  It seems that Theta waves are most prominent
during meditation.

[1] entry://../quack/20120607-140915
[2] http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Delta_wave
[3] http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Theta_wave


Entry: Last couple of days
Date: Sun Jun 10 21:35:03 EDT 2012

Things have been weird and different.  I get fruitions (blips/sneezes)
quite often, and they start to annoy me, so I wonder if they are
really fruitions.  They don't leave bliss waves unless I am already in
high concentration.  I get muscle contractions every time.  My head
seems to shoot up.

The "self dropping out".  This feels right as the point to focus on.
It's harder.  It happens during the day in brief moments, but is more
stable during formal practice.  Maybe I should start calling these
PCEs?

I've not been doing much formal Jhana practice.  However I do fall
into Jhana states pretty easily.  Combining them with Metta works very
well, and is probably more of what I need at this time.  As I've read,
insight and metta eventually come together, but they are not really
for me at this time.

For the rest I'm mostly interested getting my feet on the ground
again.  I'm still a bit shook up.  Last couple of days (since
thursday) where filled with unsatisfactoriness and fairly deep
embedding; buying into the stuff..  I've also had some stronger bouts
of fear coming up.  Today was the first time that I could look through
it, observing the sensations it made up.  Some weird fear dreams
passed by also.


Entry: Piercing through fear
Date: Mon Jun 11 08:23:58 EDT 2012

I got to the selfless soup-of-sensations state yesterday, but only
after piercing through a layer of fear that hasn't been there before.
It's nameless fear.  Manifests as visual images of angry faces, a fear
of going crazy.  Leaning into it, observing the fine detail of
sensations and their causal/sequential relation (visual images that
triggered thoughts of going crazy) made it go away eventually, but
that was a bit scary in itself.

The idea of "missing something" is now becoming more clear.  The
selfless state comes by itself whenever the current self-loop is let
go of in a state of high concentration.

The blips are still there.  They happen frequently but that's all.  I
don't feel a big state shift after that, only the some subtle tension
gone.  The selfless state is still much more profound.

Conclusion is that I should really stop talking to people about this
stuff and start practicing with more direction.  Simply sitting worked
for a while, but now it seems to just make my mind wander and fall
asleep.  Might be that I'm more tired these days with the heat.



Entry: Embedded
Date: Fri Jun 15 10:53:10 EDT 2012

Switching between being strongly embedded in resentment and popping
out of it, realizing the futility.  Little "real" insight.  What seems
to be going on is more of a conceptual reorganization.

The selfless experience does change view.  Hard to describe, but it
shifts base.  It shifts "what's important".  Embedding (buying into
the story) is still present in a strong way, but the sense of being is
different.  Less attachment to "how things should be" in an absolute
way.  Attachment still pops up but is easier recognized as just a
construct.

In short, the collection of constructs covered by the construct
"important" has changed.  



Entry: Today's sit
Date: Sun Jun 17 21:22:39 EDT 2012

I've been stuck in a rut for a couple of days.  Dukkha trip.  Mostly
resentment.  Decided to do a formal sit to end up in the state of
selflessness I've described in recent posts.  It seems that talking
about this too much had turned it into an concept too much, preventing
the expiernce to unfold.  Sit was quite painful.  Difficulty
concentrating.  I tried jhana approach and I think I got to 2nd, then
things went muddy.  Kept going, moved in front of the big fan to feel
the wind and focus on that, next to a state of being that resembled
reobservation.

After 45 minutes it broke open.  Man this is so different than
ordinary "wax".  Free.  Open.

It's hard to describe how being in a certain state makes it hard to
imagine being in another.  How could any of that stuff I went through
an hour ago be any problem at all?  It's so obvious and simple.



Entry: Last week
Date: Sun Jun 24 08:52:44 EDT 2012

Mostly filled with work.  Dit not meditate much, except for early this
week when I got to the selfless state once.  Feel mostly crappy.

Not sure why I'm not doing it.  Bleh I guess.  Strong embedding.


Entry: Another week
Date: Mon Jul  2 01:30:33 EDT 2012

Mostly filled with holiday camping trip and some chores before and
after.  Did some meditation under the trees.  Got a brief look at
selflessness and a look at fear of the dark and sleeping outside.

Things are slacking.  I feel quite embedded during the day, and tired
at night, unable to concentrate well.  Looks like it's time for some
more directed practice.



Entry: Midday sit
Date: Mon Jul  2 13:13:08 EDT 2012

I noted some preoccupation with stuff and desire for selflessness.
That latter feeling is really insidious.  The goal of my current
practice is to re-experience the self dropping out, but it seems that
the presence of this goal is the only thing that keeps it ongoing.

This seems to be impossible to control.  The drop out "just happens"
when everything is let go of and sensory experience "comes closer".
I'm having a lot of near misses where I see the onset of this
experience, but some kind of thought or reaction makes it go away
again.

Still a lot of blips.  These happen almost instantaneously when I sit
down.  Before a blip there is a build-up of something resembling
pressure: something is "clogging the system" as it were.  After the
blip this tension is gone, but I don't feel anything special, i.e. no
bliss except for a very faint echo of relief related to this tension.
Then after anything from a second to a minute, it happens again, and
again..

It seems that not experiencing the selfless state causes a regression
to more embedding: more preoccupation, resentment, avoiding social
contact.


Entry: Absorption
Date: Mon Jul  2 22:56:18 EDT 2012

Not sure where or what I'm doing.  I just sit and start focusing on
"focus" or something like that, bringing the attention back to that
point when I'm wandering off.  This leads to very deep absorption.

I got to a point today which is the "fluffy hands" expierence I've had
in the past before I started meditating, but when I got into some kind
of weird mental state by circumstances.  Very hard to describe, but it
feels like my hands are very thick and fat, like those of a baby.



Entry: New formal approach
Date: Tue Jul  3 12:14:55 EDT 2012

After breaking the ice it seems I need to find a new way to proceed.
My practice is currently unstructured and confusing.

Additionally, all that I read about meditation confuses me more, and
some kind of information overload seems to be happening, probably
triggered by becoming aware of differing opintions and views.

Before I reached the stage of equanimity the noting/investigating
approach seemed to work well.  At the current point I have trouble
doing so, and I feel more drawn to "just sit" instead of focusing on
the 3 characteristics[2].  This corresponds to most things I've read
from Nikolai who refers to Kenneth Folk's Three Speed Transmission
approach[1].

I've already used both approaches mentioned in [2].  Noting helps with
moving along the path up to equanimity, especially the dark night
stages, while concentration & surrender work better at equanimity and
maybe at reobservation.  I can confirm stat stages are more clear when
investigation is high.  When "just sitting" it is not always clear
what's happening.

I'm going to stick to Kenneth's / Nikolai's approach for a while.


[1] http://kennethfolkdharma.wetpaint.com/page/The+Three+Speed+Transmission
[2] http://kennethfolkdharma.wetpaint.com/page/The+Controversy


Entry: Jhanic states
Date: Mon Jul  9 10:39:47 EDT 2012

Didn't practice yesterday, but the days before I got back on track.
Feeling better.

Something that has changed recently: When I'm not too agitated, I can
close my eyes and point my eyeballs to the lower left corner and go to
a jhanic state almost instantaneously.  I assume this is one of the
states above 4th, as there is a "boundless" aspect to it.  Stepping
out of it, even after as little as 5 seconds, leaves me in a bit of a
buzzed state which takes say 15 seconds to recover from.



Entry: Selfless State
Date: Tue Jul 10 13:25:46 EDT 2012

Regained access to the selfless state after reclining, reading[1] and
sitting.  What did it this time was to look at the fan in the window,
and focus on the "me" overlay looking at the fan.  In the beginning it
was very clearly there, now it's somewhat faint.  I did not get to a
point that felt like "woah, it's gone!" like happened before, but I do
feel that it's different from being very prominently there.  One of
the consequences of it dropping out seems to be that it becomes quite
easy to see when it's there, as it always was.

It goes a bit like this: get to a point of calm concentration and look
out the window until the this/there distinction becomes clear, and
some self-related thoughts are apparent (e.g. "after the meditation
i'm going to do this and that and ...").

The point of calm concentration is important.  It seems that "wanting"
to get to this state and becoming a bit agitated because of failure
has been very hard for me to see.  Can't get there if those wants are
not seen clearly and subsequently dropped (automatically) - no
exception.

So I'm waiting for sense of self to return and then try it again to
see if it is repoducable or if this conceptualization is again
self-defeating.

So..  It just dropped.  Nothing spectacular.  There is no clear "jump"
but there are some gradual shifts that suddenly land me in a direct
experience as opposed to the me/it distinction.  I tried to focus on
me then on it and swap about twice per second up to a point where I
realized that I was moving my eyes when I was focusing on "me" and
then there was just these eye movements and the "me" was no longer
there.  I didn't see it drop or fade over the course of a second like
happened before; it was just no longer there when I looked.

Doing this switch between me/it seems to just make the mind get tired
of the game and just give up the distinction.


[1] http://thehamiltonproject.blogspot.com/2012/05/appreciation-abandon-overlay.html


Entry: Catching morning resentment
Date: Tue Jul 17 09:28:14 EDT 2012

Waking up always has been full of suffering for me.  The prevailing
emotion is: "leave me alone".  It's the worst time of the day for
dealing with stuff.  Just want to crawl into a corner and hide.  Maybe
think about fun things to do with the day while brain starts to come
online after coffee.

Recently I've been able to catch it a bit easier: the resentment
subsides when I'm able to clearly identify it.  Most of the time this
seems to be a reaction to tasks that are a bit to hard to oversee.
Usually the solution is to just start, and stop resisting.



Entry: New path starting?
Date: Wed Jul 18 12:58:34 EDT 2012

Experiencing anxiety (general, unspecific feeling of fear) triggered
by some recent events.  I'm experiencing a lot of resentment and
excapism towards my general affairs.

Since things have been going so well lately, I find it a bit odd.
Maybe I'm on the way to a new path?  I still get fruitions, but the
"selfless" experience has become different.  It's as if it is
deconstructing more.  As if I see some of the fabrications that where
still there the first couple of times I went through the overlay drop.

I've been noticing that the feeling of my eyes moving in their
sockets, and the feeling of the eye muscles seem to be still quite
attached to "me".  When focusing on these, there have been occasions
where I'm no longer "behind" them, as if my consciousness detaches
from space.  Maybe this is a new jhana?  Seems to correspond to
boundless space, 6th jhana.

Current assumption is that I'm entering into the dark night of 2nd
path.  Probably best to start sitting more, focusing on surrender.  I
have a strong urge to loose myself in comforting behaviour like I did
last 2 days watching TV.


Entry: Another dark night?
Date: Fri Jul 20 08:41:15 EDT 2012

Days filled with resentment.  It's funny because I recognize this
pattern.  I know that the solution lies in noting and surrender, but
the pull towards embedding is very strong.

The irony is that this can't be "controlled".  Technically, it can be
controlled but not by trying to control it, only by letting go.


Entry: Dukkha weekend
Date: Sat Jul 21 17:13:56 EDT 2012

Completely absorved by stuff (planning, conflict, despair) to a point
that I didn't think was possible any more.  It's easier to recover.
It's easier to see the "no worry" zone.  There is something about bare
experience that really transcends all that stuff generally called
life.

However, life is there to live, and sometimes conflicts and decisions
come up that can be quite emotionally challenging.

I haved been upset like this in months.  The solution is so simple:
not to step into the mess, but I already did.  And it's heavily
intertwined with other things.  I need clarity.

What I come to when I do meditate in this state is to look for peace.
To first find peace and then work from that.  Peace with the situation
(acceptance), and peace with the people involved (compassion).



Entry: Nothing
Date: Mon Jul 23 17:17:01 EDT 2012

  Only when there is nothing, is there no stress[1].

Got this quote from correspondence with Nikolai.  This is starting to
sink in, slowly.  Nick mentioned that seeying through the 'self'
overlay would guide further practice, and this is now obvious.

After a particulary distressful couple of days I've found a new
appreciation for meditation.  Experience has been relatively deep.
The intense weekend followed a week of being stuck in self-absorbed
wallowing.

It can only be found right here.

It is remarkable that the experience of frution completely obliterates
everything, all ideas of "my life".

  Nothing can be found in the past which has fundamental importance[1].

[1] http://www.buddhanet.net/ayyatalk.htm


Entry: My projects
Date: Mon Jul 23 20:31:26 EDT 2012

What I'm thinking is that maybe I should let go of all those
unfinished projects.  Most of them are so ambitious they create more
suffering than pleasure of discovery, which seems to be why I take
them on.

Or.. I could try to take them less serious?  Take more of a distance?
Be aware when resentment sets in?  There seems to be a fundamental
conflict between doing a task, living in the moment on one side, and
to be fueled by desire, working towards a goal on the other side.
Maybe the trick is that there is no goal, only work and "bonding" with
the subject?  I can feel this sometimes when I do mathematical things
where the ratio of thinking to doing is much higher than for ordinary
programming work.  Just sit and let it flow.  It doesn't need a goal
apart from clearing the obvious obstacles.

EDIT: From some perspective it is clearly not important.  I can
clearly see the attachment to making something I thought of work, and
also the irrelevance of actually doing so.  It seems with this
meditation stuff, the bottom falls out of things and there is no fixed
reference point except for that state of acceptance that transcends
everything.  Much of what I do seems to be an attempt to be noticed,
special, appreciated.  From an ordinary life perspective it's hard to
see what to do with the knowledge that this is empty.  Kenneth
mentions this disconnet will pass and make room for compassion.  I now
understand better how Vipassana and Metta go hand in hand..


Entry: The Witness
Date: Tue Jul 31 10:12:42 EDT 2012

Meditation has been unstructured lately, but I do feel I'm going the
right direction.  I'm using surrender as the basic technique, which I
guess is 3rd gear.  This leads to equanimity and selfless states,
though I'm not sure if this is 2nd or 3rd gear in Kenneth's approach.

The selfless states do correspond very well to descriptions of 3rd
gear, especially descriptions about how to get there: by surrender.

So I'd like to try 2nd gear practice - dwelling in the witness.  From [1]:

  So I like to make the point that when you really get this Witness,
  it is very clear. It is a very distinct experience where the knowing
  mind is clearly looking back at itself in a kind of mirroring way.

Nikolai start's talking about this at some point in his practice
log[2] which then links to a separate post in [3].

[1] http://www.buddhistgeeks.com/2010/04/the-witness-turning-the-light-around-2/
[2] http://thehamiltonproject.blogspot.com/2011/06/yogis-journal-from-1st-to-4th-path.html
[3] http://thehamiltonproject.blogspot.com/2011/01/yogi-toolbox-riding-jhanic-arc-via.html


Entry: Resentment in daily life
Date: Wed Aug  1 19:10:21 EDT 2012

[stuff]  This has more content than usual.

More concretely, dealing with "being part of the machine", working
around problems created by other people due to lack of insight (must
add, would probably have made mistakes myself, but a different kind,
so it's easier to resent these particular things at hand because I
would not have made them..  I do have a good track record of not
getting things right the first time...

The strange part is this very strong feeling of resentment that feels
like "your fucking problem, don't bother me with it".  It's odd,
because it's my job to fix these things.  And generally I'm doing just
fine in the end, and once I understand things I actually enjoy it.

It's the story around it that somehow gets toxic and out-of-hand.
Upto recently I did not really have a good way to deal with this,
except for stepping out of it and *doing something else* that does not
involve thinking.

I.e. running away.

I'm taking this as a meditation object, to go through the motion of
deconstructing the whole pattern, and learning how not to get hooked
again.

And it's definitely possible to deconstruct it.  There are two main
components: a realization that "now is not the time".  For some reason
the task is too difficult, but it is hard to see why this is.
Elements are: general fatigue, perceived arbitrariness, perceived lack
of control.  Perceived pointlessness: when solved, the problem will
come back in another form.

Boredom, hopelessness, disinterest, irrelevance.

The base sensation seems to be fatigue: this work requires a lot of
context which is impossible to maintain in short term memory when
fatigue increases.  The interesting part is that fatigue is not
absolute: it is a construction.  If for some reason an interesting
connection pops up, fatigue disappears.

So let's go with the assumption that the fatigue is actually boredom.
How to pierce boredom?

Reading comments in [1] it seems that boredom is not the right word.
It's too broad.  Bored with "having to do something".  What I'm
experiencing is more being bored with being goal-oriented, with
absence of play.  Bored with forced attention without payback.

Here[2] boredom proneness is related to failure of attention.  So I
wonder if it is possible to overcome boredom by increasing attention
using some trick that bypasses the "forced" feeling.  Attention is
effortless when there is relevance, though relevance is hard to fake..

Maybe "just do it" is the solution: start doing the boring work, but
try really hard to focus on sensations that arise while doing.

[1] http://www.dharmaoverground.org/web/guest/discussion/-/message_boards/message/3244586
[2] http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Boredom



Entry: Integration: not getting hooked on resentment
Date: Fri Aug  3 01:35:32 EDT 2012

Chop wood, carry water.
Also before enlightenment.

I think it's safe to say that the first real problem is solved after 8
months of regular practice: when I am idle, I am OK.

The next step is to carry this to environments that are a little more
challenging: right after waking up, before getting to work, after
completing a task and feeling "done" before it's done.


Entry: Replace judgement with compassion
Date: Fri Aug  3 01:40:02 EDT 2012

This seems to be the killer hook.  Getting bent out of shape because
something isn't like it's supposed to be.


Entry: Understanding conflict
Date: Fri Aug  3 12:03:34 EDT 2012

To understand conflict, the first step is to be accepting and honest
about your own contribution.  Being clear about that, it is possible
to see the other side.

Transcending the emotional roller coaster is an important part of it:
letting go of the desired outcome is key to this.


Entry: Judgement
Date: Fri Aug 10 21:06:08 EDT 2012

[stuff] Mostly embedded..  Looking at this embedding.  Having a hard
time with meditation so it will be conceptual.

Trying to see what the problem is in some problems I have to tackle
for work.  Doing mental work without some form of "interest" seems to
be nearly impossible.  Ideas and solutions just come when a problem is
absorbed fully.  It requires time and energy to do this absorbing, and
it seems that it is exactly this "pain" that is resented in cases
where the payoff doesn't really bring value.

Concrete example: part of the task I'm doing right now requires to fit
a square peg into a round hole, meaning that both components work, but
are not adjusted to each other, so I have to take one component apart
and adjust it to the other.  There is no "perceived" benefit from
this, and cognitively it is exactly this wrong perception that is the
cause of the resentment.  In practice, this hurdle needs to be taken
for it to work, but the work is not interesting and requires more
absorbtion of details that are temporary and boring.  ( The remainder
of the task where details that are somehow interesting or universal.
Current details are just disconnect with previous programmer's
style. )

Problem: how to detach from this and "just do" the work?  From memory,
what seems to help is seeing exactly how this resentment or attachment
is taking place.  When such clarity arises, it is usually effortless,
or at least, there is no longer resistance.

At this moment I have a hard time getting over the threshold.  I'm
tired and bored, and I know that while those things make it hard to
get started, they do not make it impossible: a change of view is in
order, a change of perspective that makes it obvious the job needs
just to be done.



Entry: Writing a lot lately
Date: Fri Aug 10 21:19:07 EDT 2012

Meditation is jhana-like.  I've not been steering much, as I slip into
absorption pretty easily.  Tend to write a lot.  Stories are forming.
Maybe filling up gaps made by previous meditation sessions.

Tuning in, mostly disgust?  Not sure, just had a brief wave of misery.
Feel confusion, lack of clarity.



Entry: Loosing touch
Date: Fri Aug 10 21:27:00 EDT 2012

What helps is to read about this stuff again, to be reminded of things
that have suddenly become invisible, clouded by embedding.  There
seems to be a trigger now where simple remembering of a certain
technique can make it kick in immediately, seeing some kind of
"sequence" that leads to a different affective state.  A path if you
will.



Entry: Talking too much
Date: Sun Aug 12 13:19:38 EDT 2012

Yes.


Entry: Confusion
Date: Sun Aug 12 13:19:43 EDT 2012

Observing subtleties in confusion.  Going back to Daniel's advice
(paraphrasing): if your distracted, how do you know? That's another
sensation.  Been trying to do this and it does break up things a bit.


Entry: Beginner mind
Date: Sun Aug 12 13:21:10 EDT 2012

Found that every time I think I "know" something, or talk about
things, it falls apart.  Any conceptualization seems to be detrimental
unless it does what you need to hear: to drop the conceptualization.

Starting to appreciate the notion of "beginner's mind"[1].

[1] http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shoshin


Entry: Space
Date: Fri Aug 17 19:20:11 EDT 2012

Starting to see the sensation of space/gestalt as something that
arises and passes.  Strange.  Seems that this perception of space or
"being situated" is firmly part of the "self" complex.


Entry: Different
Date: Mon Aug 27 00:56:33 CEST 2012

Things are different.  Came back from a flight with 10 hours delay,
which would normally set me off quite a bit.  I felt fine.  There
where some moments where I almost went off on a self-pity trip but it
seemed to trigger the "ah. pain is arising" switch which just places
me into a ride-the-wave mode, and things pass through without getting
hooked.  This is awesome ;)

Need to get back to formal meditation though.

Also, started readig this book[1], and when I got to the chapter about
emotions, a lot of things aligned with experience from meditation.
Some parallels:

* Emotions are experienced in the body (they are felt).  Apparently
  this is because of hormone receptors throughout the body: the
  explanation is that higher level emotions are built on top of the
  mechanism for lower level emotions such as pain, in that they react
  to internal (hormonal) stimuli instead of external stimili.  The
  main advantage of this system over direct neural processing is time:
  emotions have a longer time span than thoughts, the time span of a
  couple of seconds to a couple of minutes as opposed to say
  sub-second duration of pure cognitive states.

* The mechanism of "cause and effect" was mentioned: emotion triggers
  thought triggers emotion etc...  There are no emotions that take a
  long time past a minute or so, there is just a sequence of
  empotional states kept going by cognitive/emotional feedback.  It
  also said that "it's easy to forget" this is the form of the
  mechanism when being inside such an episode.  Ha!

[1] http://mitpress.mit.edu/catalog/item/default.asp?tid=12451&ttype=2



Entry: Jhanas
Date: Sat Sep  8 15:25:03 CEST 2012

Been practicing the concentration jhanas a bit past week.  It's a bit
less clear compared to experiences I had on the Saugatuck trip, but I
have the impression that I can distinguish 5th and 6th jhana
(boundless space and boundless consiousness).

The transition from 4th to 5th is quite clear in that the usual
inclusive awareness of space, which is very prominent in 4th, drops
away and is replaced by something quite different.  That state feels
much more other-worldy than the first four, making the term "formless"
a bit more meaningful.

I'm not quite sure that I can distinguish between 5th and 6th.  The
experience is that of being at the center of things, surrounded by
blackness, emptyness.  Maybe it is is all 5th judging from memory of
descriptions.  There is a transition from 5th but I can't describe it.



Entry: Glenthorne
Date: Sat Sep  8 15:38:57 CEST 2012

Ran into Minker at Glenthorne[5].  Did some shared meditiation and had
a talk.  He handed me some notes from a Tushita[2] two day Shamatha
Meditation Retreat, based on a book "The Heart of the Buddha" by
Trungpa Rinpoche[3].  Course guided by Glen Svensson[1].

It might be that these[4] are the audio files.  Not 100% sure.

[1] http://www.glensvensson.org/
[2] http://www.tushita.info/
[3] isbn://0877735921
[4] http://www.glensvensson.org/7-point-mind-training.html
[5] http://www.glenthorne.org/


Entry: New experience.
Date: Sat Sep  8 18:44:06 CEST 2012

I've been experiencing a new kind of wave/cycle going into focus.  It
is a cycle of about 20-30 seconds if it is not interrupted by snapping
out of its transition point.

The experience is triggered by focusing on the sensation of my eyes
and visual patterns with eyes closed.  It goes through a gradual
change of folding/rotating upto something that reminds me of a locked
joint, i.e. a joint that can no longer rotate further, and needs a
swift rotation in a different direction to continue the seemingly
gradual motion of the attached limb.

If the sensation is not resisted (approaching it feels odd and a bit
like approaching the edge of a cliff) it seems to fold inside-out,
then proceeding with the folding/rotation motion.  This tripping point
is not 100% discontinuous, but it feels like a rapid movement that
can't be completely tracked.

From the discription, this looks like a fruition cycle.  States and
sensations that are "near" this one, meaning reachable from a similar
starting state, do evoke the more familiar discontinuous, slightly
painful/disturbing blip I've described before.  These blips are still
accompanied by contractions in facial muscles.

What is different from the blip is that I definitely see this one
coming, and it requires a kind of readiness and surrender to sit
through it.

It seems as if there is a choice to "handle" a blip in a different
way.  As if the blips I've been experiencing are in fact flinches away
from an approaching "joint flip".





Entry: A general, all-purpose jhana thread
Date: Sat Sep  8 19:32:39 CEST 2012

moha-samadhi / delusion concentration[1]

  "When you emerge, you find it hard to identify where exactly you
  were focused." This can come about "when the breath gets so
  comfortable that your focus drifts from the breath to the sense of
  comfort itself, mindfulness begins to blur and your sense of the
  body and your surroundings gets lost in a pleasant haze."

  In this pleasant haze, the mind is exposed to a highly suggestive
  mind state wherein almost anything imagined can be taken literally
  for the truth.



five factors[1]

  In Buddhist meditation, the development of concentrative absorption
  in the case of the first jhana is described in terms of the
  following five factors:

  * directed attention (vitakka)
  * sustained attention or examination and evaluation (vicra)
  * joy/rapture/elation (pti)
  * happiness/pleasure/bliss (sukha)
  * equanimity (upekkh)


I can't really distinguish vitakka and vicara, but the description of
piti and sukha seems quite natural indeed: piti being an initial jolt
of joy followed by a more sustained fade of bliss.



[1] http://www.dharmaoverground.org/web/guest/discussion/-/message_boards/message/1191517



Entry: Attachment
Date: Mon Sep 17 09:37:42 CEST 2012

It is now clear, seeping through on a cognitive level, that there is
nothing to be gained, only to be lost.

It is also clear that this goes against all common sense!

It is also clear that many desires are hidden, and deeply ingrained.

And that second order desire (wanting someone to want something) can
be quite subtle to identify.


Entry: Sila
Date: Mon Sep 17 11:34:42 CEST 2012

from [1]

  Integral with the effort to teach serenity is the encouragement of
  the practice of sila (virtue or morality). The importance of sila
  cannot be stressed enough. Its practice is the foundation for a
  practice in serenity (samatha). Without a clear conscience, mental
  calm in contemplation and meditation will be difficult to come by. A
  guilty conscience can be a hotbed of mental agitation. If a person
  is lying, cheating, stealing or whatever, these actions can weigh on
  the mind, distracting it from being able to calm down while in
  sitting meditation. If an individual is having a difficult time
  being able to calm the mind during meditation, this is one of the
  first places they should look in self examination in order to
  determine the source of the disturbance.

Something I noticed is that this doesn't have to be "active".  A
guilty feeling due to an absence of right action is just as potent as
active immoral acts.

[1] http://www.dharmaoverground.org/web/guest/discussion/-/message_boards/message/1191517


Entry: The overlay
Date: Thu Sep 20 01:39:45 CEST 2012

In recent sits it's been more straightforward to drop the self overlay
and experience the "soup of sensations".  It seems to be useful to
focus on the point where the overlay re-instates itself.  This makes
it easier to recognize the "border" that i've described before as
"near miss".

A near miss seems to be tied to a wanting to experience a drop of
overlay, possibly because of its associated bliss.  There seems to be
a point where the drop is not cognized as something to be experienced,
but as something to come home to.  It seems that dropping the overlay
is dropping "life" as in "my life" - all vested interests.

Once reached, the state is stable as long as concentration is
maintained.  When concentration is lost, some thought patterns can
re-instate a clear sense of self in the background, meaning that once
the re-instating thought pattern is intercepted and concentration is
re-applied, the sens of self remains prominent, and needs to be
dropped or allowed to drop once again to return to the original state.



Entry: Fear of gettig to know people
Date: Thu Sep 20 01:53:09 CEST 2012

One of the reasons I got into meditation is to get a handle on
anxiety.  This has worked well.  However, there is one class of
problems that is not covered well: being forced to talk to people I do
not know when I really don't want to.  It happened twice in two days
last week, and several times in last month.

A strong attachment to being left alone if you wish.
A collapse of compassion.
A shutting down.

This seems to be part of my introvert makup, but still, it feels
out-of-place with the general feeling of being a lot more stable,
imperturbable.  There's something I'm not seeing clearly..

It might be just a lack of social skill.  I.e. a technical problem.
Still there is a strong suffering component involved, and if for some
reason I can do a "mode switch" into "new people mode" it all works
just fine.

Maybe an interesting problem to just try to trigger more.  Meet more
people?  Go to the place that scares me?

One of the sentiments I've noticed is hate.  I really don't want to
have anything to do with people I do not know, and that do not have
anthing I feel naturally attracted to, something to talk about.

The suffering might be because I do not want to see that hate.  Might
be good to try to see where it comes from.  Give it some air.

I even have this on the internet, when I see pictures of people next
to an article.  There's something about unfamiliar faces that is
really repulsive..

Maybe it is that the face is not associated to a communication
protocol yet?  That seems to be what "getting to know" somebody is:
establishing a protocol.  The basic mechanism is one of making
mistakes and forgiving mistakes in the other party, but giving subtle
cues that something is not appreciated.  My problem seems to be that
my fear for making the mistakes is very high.  Once I've seen people
interact with others I do a lot better: I've been able to build some
kind of mental model to talk to..

So it seems that the fear of "shooting in the dark" is what needs to
be addressed.

[1] http://www.socialphobia.org/social.html
[2] http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cognitive_behavioral_therapy



Entry: Out of the bubble
Date: Fri Sep 28 15:57:34 EDT 2012

Had a nice 1 month break from things, but don't really feel rested.
Much resentment with life starting again.  Work, home, ... it doesn't
seem to matter.  Very strong sense of self/embedding.  Selfplex is
fighting back.

I don't feel stable.  Lots of emotional triggeres recently, maybe this
is backfire.  Haven't meditated since I got back, or a couple of days
before I left for that matter.  Life seems a dream.  I'm in pain and I
cought a cold yesterday so feel dull.


Entry: Seeing in the seen
Date: Tue Oct  9 14:39:00 EDT 2012

There's something in the blinks.  Something that is still seen as self
but is not.  Another layer of the onion?

Yesterday I was sitting, trying to come to the recognizable point of
self dropping out, and while it sort of happened, it felt different.
As if there are still subtle parts that are not clearly seen.  There
was less of a blissful, peaceful feel but more of a curious "hey
that's odd" weaving through the soup.  Also related to the turning
inside-out described here[2], and linked to the sensations related to
the eye and seeing/visualizing.  As if this system is some kind of
"box with walls" that drop away once the motion is seen as
constructed.  Another way of saying: it seems that the connection
between the idea of "space" in a visualization is disconnected from
the visualization.

Following Nikolai's 'What does "seeing in the seen, hearing in the
heard" mean?' (mentioned here [1][3] but also in other points and in
pm.)  I've gotten to the point where this sentence has moved from
being confusing and meaningless to seemingly corresponding to this
experience that has been hiding in the gaps.

Haven't done much formal meditation in the last week, just
here-and-there mindfulness, and I still slip easily into jhana (Edit:
[4] might be a good way to go.) if I just focus on the pleasantness of
sitting or being in the body.

In general, life is absorbing, but something has happened or shifted
in meaning to sensences like "what do I want from life".  The way in
which I'm looking to answer this question has changed a lot.
Obsession is fading, but dispair (its negative) still rises.

I have a nagging pain in my sholder that distracts me from opening up
during formal sits.  It causes tension that is hard to identify and
takes me on a ride.

When I'm out taking a walk with the wife and dogs and the wind and
light create an intense play, there are moments of self drops that
seem to be suspended between moments of self.  This often happens when
I'm listening to a story, and the attribution of meaning to the story
seems to need this reference point of self.

Edit: after a short sit reaching a fairly equanimous state of being
without a clear sense of self, there was a transition to a clear sense
of self with focus on it, which I assume is "the witness".  I kept
focus on this for a bit.


[1] http://thehamiltonproject.blogspot.com/2012/05/yogi-toolbox-floaters.html
[2] entry://20120908-184406
[3] http://thehamiltonproject.blogspot.com/2012/05/yogi-toolbox-haietmoba.html
[4] http://thehamiltonproject.blogspot.com.au/2011/07/yogi-toolbox-actualizing-jhanas.html


Entry: Formless realms
Date: Tue Oct  9 15:23:19 EDT 2012

I think it's clear that I have (had) access to 5th/6th Jhana so it
might be good to guide practice a bit to stabilize this and see what
they are like, i.e. to investigate.

[1] http://thehamiltonproject.blogspot.com.au/2011/07/yogi-toolbox-actualizing-jhanas.html
[2] http://thehamiltonproject.blogspot.com.au/2011/06/yogi-toolbox-pceaf-like-approach-to.html


Entry: Dark night?
Date: Thu Oct 18 09:11:48 EDT 2012

I feel miserable.  "Me" feels very solid.

Some stuff is going on that takes away the quiet, but it can't have
such a deep impact.  Anger and resentment, not directed at anything in
particual but at everything at the same time.  Leave me alone.

So I wonder if this is ordinary depression that tends to kick in from
time to time, or another dark night?

Yesterday I sat through it.  It did have this all-together-crap
feeling I associate with the other dark night.  Once I was reminded
that I have to step out of this by looking into it, the head in the
wind, it seemed to dissove a bit, only to re-appear after that.

Phenomena have a strong hold on "me".  Stuff still drops out when the
"me" is let go of, but it seems to re-assert itself behind my back.

Maybe I just need to meditate in the morning.


Entry: Focusing on the arising and passing of self
Date: Sat Oct 20 14:26:43 EDT 2012

Last week was a mess. After some more intensive sits the embedding
lessened substantially.

The pattern seems very clear: If I don't do formal practice to focus
on the rising/passing of self, the self gradually gets stronger until
it is seen as solid and the cycle closes.  Focusing more on
identifying that solidification opens things up again.

This post[1] by Nikolai gives a nice recipe for this process.

[1] http://thehamiltonproject.blogspot.com/2012/10/appreciation-khemaka-sutta.html



Entry: Sloth & embedding
Date: Thu Oct 25 15:14:14 EDT 2012

An interesting experience is that, being in a state of sloth, it is
not at all apparent that meditation i.e. concentrating on immediate
awareness actually does anything good.  Same for other kinds of
embedding in strong craving/aversion.

It takes a bit of courage to then sit down and go for it.  Often
(still?) this is too much to ask.



Entry: Stuck
Date: Wed Oct 31 19:33:01 EDT 2012

After a nice couple of days of doing this[1], I now feel stuck again.
Did not get to any direct experience apart from very brief moments.
Pervading sensation is frustration, stuckness, desire for things to be
different.  Noting that it lifts a bit but in the session I just had I
space out without being able to refocus.

Overall, today feels stuck.

There is some life stuff going on in the background that is provoking
rections, so I might be blinded by some attachment/aversion thing.
Looks like that's the first place to go.

EDIT: Yep I think that was it.  Calm returned after acknowledgement

[1] http://thehamiltonproject.blogspot.com/2012/10/appreciation-khemaka-sutta.html



Entry: Terminology
Date: Wed Oct 31 20:02:47 EDT 2012

An update on terminology:

- center/overlay dropping out.  This has been a fairly clear event,
  and is the thing I am looking out for.  It happens either after
  sitting in strong concentration for a bit, or just like that sitting
  in the yard or walking the dogs.  The former is fairly stable while
  the latter is fleeting.  I've noticed that sound is a trigger, maybe
  because it has this "all around" quality to it, e.g the sound of
  leaves in the winds.  Also the wind by itself has this all around /
  all over thing to it.  I noticed this sitting in front of a big fan
  this summer.  The effect of the dropout is clearest on vision: it is
  really as if some kind of glass border is removed between me and the
  world.

- fuitions or blips.  I'm still not sure what I experience are
  fruitions, but they can definitely be described as blips.  They are
  accompanied by a startled twich which might just be my constructed
  reaction to them (like the sound or motion of a proper sneeze is
  also somewhat an "act").



Entry: The answer to which one shoould I pick..
Date: Sun Nov  4 16:51:32 EST 2012

is neither.


Entry: Stuck
Date: Mon Nov  5 22:13:16 EST 2012

Still stuck at the same point.  Experiencing lots of embedding.
Anger.  Frustration.  Storylines.  That hasn't happened in a while.

It starts to look like another dark night.

Looking for some inspiration about where to look[1].

Daniel mentioned somewhere that 2nd path is much like 1st path: the
same lessons need to be learned but for different territory.

  Daniel, from [1]: Oh, as to renunciation: the renunciation of
  misperception is the key renunciation. The rest are of superficial
  benefit unless they are things that really keep you stuck for some
  reason in a mode of attention that precludes investigation.


[1] http://www.dharmaoverground.org/web/guest/discussion/-/message_boards/message/1098397


Entry: Real-time drop out blogging
Date: Fri Nov  9 15:19:50 EST 2012

Experiencing a centerless state at this moment.  It is less profound
as the previous ones in that it has less release.

Loosing focus made it go away.

It came about by just staring at some code after a good day of
programming.

It fades in and out.

Main property is peace.  A lack of things.  A lack of "stuff".

Maybe I should eat more chocolate ;)
Just ate about half a cup of drops Chorardelli baking chips.

EDIT: Then life continued.  There is something special about the
simplicity of not being there, and the echo of it when getting
re-absorbed.  That little reminder of thoughts that sound like
"don't forget, already there".



Entry: Drop the agenda
Date: Sat Nov 10 00:50:57 EST 2012

When you're present, you forget to suffer[1].

EDIT: I probably need to learn to switch back to 1st gear.  I've been
doing a lot of which is I guess 2nd gear practice, to focus on the
self, the arising and passing away and the nature of its components.

When the embedding in self is very strong, this gets difficult, as the
embedding itself starts to steer focus away from the bare sensations.

I've noticed that when I'm displaying procrastinating behavior, the
embedding is usually particulary strong, but unnoticed.  ( Yeah, not
going _there_, I don't want that. )

[1] http://jaytek.net/KFD/04%20NYC%20Talk%20-%20What%20Is%20Not%20Spiritual%20Materialism%20-%20Feb%208,%202011.mp3



Entry: Facing resentment
Date: Sun Nov 11 15:28:04 EST 2012

Time to integrate life and practice more. Compartmentalization is the
problem.  There is no difference between "work time" and "meditation
time".  I know this from what I read, and I know it cognitively in a
sense of "should be doing".  Once I actually do it, I know it
intrinsically.  The trouble is those times when it seems I do not want
to see the truth.  When "me" needs room to do some looping.

Ok.  There we go.  Going to face a task that causes a lot of
reactivity.


Entry: Reobservation 2nd path
Date: Mon Nov 12 10:47:10 EST 2012

One of the lessons to learn in the dark night is that 1) "you" are not
in control.  Once that is seen, it is possible to progress to the more
deeper lesson that 2) "you" is actually a sensation, not a real thing.

It seems hard to see 2) before doing the intermediate step of 1),
letting go of the constructed sensation of having any kind of control
or power.

It is as if these are layered: the illustion of control is built on
top of the illusion of self; it sort of cements it in.  Can't get to
self if you can't get past control.  This seems to be one of the big
lessons of the dark night: to see the layering of the wrong views and
subsequently let them go.  (Letting go is easy once it is clearly
seen.)

I think I'm in reobservation of 2nd path.  The overall over-the-top
out-of-sync feeling of last couple of days subsided yesterday in a
sit, moving towards something similar to early equanimity of 1st path.
The experience is similar to 1st path in that I did not have any clue
of where I was until I hit the reobservation/equanimity border.


Entry: 6th Jhana
Date: Mon Nov 12 10:47:16 EST 2012

I think yesterday I hit 6th Jhana for the first time.  What I've
experienced up to now was probably only 5th (infinite space).

The transition between 5th and 6th is relatively strong.  Similar in
strength if not stronger than 4th to 5th.  A lot drops away in the
transition, and the "center of consicousness" I've seen described is
there right in front of you.  ( Visualized as some kind of grey/white
ball on a black background that radiates outwards. )


Entry: Spiritual materialism
Date: Mon Nov 12 10:50:59 EST 2012

Maybe it's time to start reading Cutting Through Spiritual Materialism
by Chogyam Trungpa[1].

It has become clear that seeing through more subtle "wants" is an
important next step.  One of these is the inability to start a formal
meditation at some times in the day.  There is something to be found
in this resistance, as it is particularly strong.

There is never an bad time for looking at the present moment.

[1] isbn://1570629579


Entry: 2nd path, same lessons as 1st path, different territory
Date: Mon Nov 12 10:56:43 EST 2012

Title is a parapharsed quote from Daniel somewhere on DhO.

This is becoming more clear now that I see the parallels more clearly.
The "different territory" is the more subtle parts of the creation of
the illusion of self, creation of the illusion of control, duality
created by separating "life" and "meditation".



Entry: Afternoon sit, dropout
Date: Tue Nov 13 12:42:58 EST 2012

Things seem to be changing.  A self drop-out experience that was
different as those I had a couple of weeks ago.  There where a couple
of blips before.  Something feels different.  Seeing things like my
desire to write down "new things I got today" more clearly.  Big wave
of compassion.  Compared to previous dropouts, this seems to be less
focused on the disappearance of a gross self illusion, but more like
the disappearance of a nuisance, an impediment to compassion.

I tried to focus on things that have been getting on my nerves lately,
and things I've used to get lost in, and they seem a lot less
problematic or imporant.  We'll see.  I see a subtle fear of loosing
this insight.  A fear of ignorance.

It was hard getting started.  Not sure when exactly the transition
happened between not being able to focus on the now and then moving to
a state of equanimity.  I did see the transition from chaos
(reobservation?) to quiet (equianimity?) in much the same way as
yesterady and before.

Let's see if this holds up.  It's as if now I see there is a big swamp
on my daily walk, and I'm afraid of falling in it and drowning.


Entry: Tension storage
Date: Wed Nov 14 13:04:48 EST 2012

Another afternoon sit, this time starting out a bit more embedded.  I
saw slight misery -> deliverance -> reobservation -> early eq. with
immediate fallback to reobservation, probably due to lack of
concentration.

Got some positive/negative embedding going on, mostly task tension.
Focusing on that tension which was hard to see apart from the tension
in the gut, I realized some facial muscle tension was part of it.  I'm
assuming this is another one of those "storage loops", because after
realizing facial tension it dropped away together with the background
"task tension" it was seemingly supporting.

Another +1 for the idea that if you feel any tension at all, it is
being kept alive by another thing in your field of view you're not
seeing, supporting the self.  Maybe it's even appropriate to define
the self as that part of your field of experience that is kept away
from attention: if you are able to focus on parts of this tucked away
experience using some kind of trick, the whole construction it
supports falls away and seems to be re-classified.

Anyway, aborted the sit because of attachment to blab about it here..



Entry: Dark night again
Date: Thu Nov 15 16:00:07 EST 2012

Another fairly sticky sit.  Tension in the stomach area.
Investigating it made it dissolve, then shifting focus to someting
else made it coming back.  ( Interp: something I'm not seeing clearly,
something in the "self blindspot" is probably causing this. )

Concentration was very low so I switched to Jhana which dropped me in
2nd almost immediately.  Very strong desire for "jhana relief" seems
to be conducive to actually getting there, though staying is harder.



Entry: Strong resentment
Date: Fri Nov 16 13:50:51 EST 2012

The target of the resentment is work, again, probably because this is
the most obvious element of daily life to pick up the "undesirable"
tag and serve as center to attach to.  But also play has been under
attack - something that is supposed to be desirable.  The latter makes
me think that I'm sinking deep into embedding again.  I got distracted
this week, wearing my "shopping hat" to aquire some more tools, so
this might have paved the way for the good old ego thing to firmly
reattach itself.

The mechanism is strange, even funny.

I now know with big certainty that _if_ I sit through it, it will fade
away and clarity will come back.  However, I don't _want_ to, becase I
know that my goals will change after the sit, and I want to keep my
current goals!  I.e. I want to be entertained, pampered, wade in
pleasure and carelessness.

This desire is its own savior.

Somehow, "it" knows that its existence is dependent upon not being
examined closely, so it puts up an even stronger fight.

Anthropomorphization aside, the pattern is probably not too far from
the truth.



Entry: Self is only pain
Date: Sat Nov 17 09:51:37 EST 2012

Colored by a little alcohol, but yesterday there was this little
moment of clarity with a thought that mainting the self "pet" only
brings suffering, followed by a blip and calm, open,
soup-of-sensations state.

What triggered it was a small "craving attention" trip triggered by
some multimedia performance art from my past that I picked up recently
to show off again.  What is clear now is the emptiness of praise and
social status, and the severity of craving.

Life in general seems to be soaked in stuff like this.  Climbing the
social ladder.  Maybe that's why I don't like crowds..  Even with my
superficial "insight" into this kind of empty human behavior, there is
plenty of this pattern baked in my own being.  Craving for attention,
admiration, status, respect, absence of blame, the label of "good
person".  All empty.


Entry: Insight desease
Date: Sat Nov 17 12:16:24 EST 2012

One of the symptoms for me is second order judgement: judging the act
of judgment in others, i.e. to see people get angry because if their
own dischord between perceived reality and (presumably) internal
representation.  This makes me sad, but also angry (as it's something
that "shouldn't be" because of attribution of guilt to others making
me feel bad by this action of judgement).

Maybe my interpretation of the term is a bit different then what is
current though[1].  For me it means "suffering caused by insight" or
"insight-induced ignorance", or "suffering caused by arrogance caused
by insight".

[1] http://www.dharmaoverground.org/web/guest/discussion/-/message_boards/message/3442180


Entry: Some progress
Date: Sat Nov 17 23:06:40 EST 2012

Interpretation is for later, I'll try to describe things.  Out of
order since a lot happened.  And quite wacky sounding..

- Half our insight sit (preceeded by some more jhana-like sits earlier
  in the day).

- An "opening of the heart" + surprise by the physical location of
  that feeling right above my heart.  Accompanied by a deep feeling of
  wellbeing radiating outwards.

- A couple of blips and a very long bliss wave, still going on almost
  3 hours after the sit.  Blips preceeded by some tension buildup in
  the head.

- A transparant soup-of-sensation awareness which is still echoing,
  fading in and out.  I had a return to a quite clenching feeling of
  self about 2 hours after the sit for about 5 minutes, then returned
  to a calm, blissful, equanimous state.

- Self comes and goes.  Self is more clearly identified with greed,
  desire, want.  Before not-want, resentment was clear but in a sticky
  way (not wanting the not-want).  Now greed is very clearly seen as
  quite destructive.

Of course, I'm looking for greed and hatred because that is supposed
to disappear in 2nd path, so expect some leading.

It seems to be more clear now, with self fading in and out, and greed
and hatred only being there when self is strongly there, that these
are coupled somehow.

Blips are still not as I see them described online.  They are a short
circuit, somewhat painful, with a buildup and muscle contractions.
It's hard to see whether there is any "experience" inside the blip.
What I notice most is the quite physical reaction to something
shifting, something releasing.  I don't know if this is a learned
reaction.  It's been fairly consistent though, but there harve also
been "near miss" blips, which have some of the tension
buildup/release, but are not discontinuous.


Entry: Feel lighter this morning
Date: Sun Nov 18 07:52:14 EST 2012

Blissful state yesterday lasted until I went to bed, after writing the
message.  Let's see now if the lightness survives work stress.

13:03 A little resentment is starting to take hold, fueled by some
disturbance of quiet in the house and the background tension of
needing to do a job, and the job not going neatly as planned.


Entry: Lighter
Date: Mon Nov 19 09:59:06 EST 2012

Something has definitely changed, feeling lighter overall.  I think
I'm cycling, I notice fear coming up periodically, but it's not
embedded, i.e. immediately recognized as empty.  Blipping a lot.

Centerlessness is easier accessible, and it seems more normal.  Some
things have stopped being a big deal.  ( [stuff] One of my pet peeves
that caused a lot of conflict in the last couple of weeks is now
clearly seen as fairly self-bound, which caused an almost immediate
release. )

2nd path?  It all resembles first path quite strongly.  Anyways, just
a model.  It is more clear now that the point is awareness, the here
and now, and that self isn't really nonexistent, but it is just a form
of organization of perception that isn't worth clinging too.  It's a
hook, an anchoring mechanism for sustained emotional states.  Stop
clinging to the self and the substrate for the anchor disappears,
making any sustained (permanent) state fade out again.


Entry: Cycle
Date: Tue Nov 20 11:39:14 EST 2012

Feeling more embedded this morning.  Stuff-induced disappointment.
Second order desire[1].

No-self / centerlessness still seems fairly accessible through will,
though there seems to be a danger to rationalize it into nihilism.
Compassion is important here..

Nikolai warned me before to not solidify equanimity: ".. even
eqaunimity can be an 'object'. When ready, let go of even that
eqaunimity. "

[1] http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Higher-order_volition


Entry: Stickyness
Date: Tue Nov 20 15:56:37 EST 2012

Stuff is sticking.  Doesn't look like a permanent change.


Entry: Expectation
Date: Tue Nov 20 19:07:49 EST 2012

It's amazing how expectation keeps propping up in regions that haven't
been "explored" yet.  I recently picked up a project I left off about
8 years ago, and much of the "object" context is still intact in
memory it seems, while most of those assumptions are void.  Some
interesting surprises there.


Entry: Waking up
Date: Fri Nov 23 12:18:32 EST 2012

There has been a serious difference between awareness in the morning
and in the evening.  Evening always has less stuff.

However, breakthroughs have mostly happened during the day.  I had my
first "dropout" (stream entry) when meditating around noon, with
plenty of stuff going around in the head.

Maybe it is just the noise that gets to me.  My morning was fairly
embedded.  Only after quiet returned (home alone) it seemed to be
possible to let go of some pretty strong judgements.

Seeing through some of the core motivations of doing what I do, I know
feel in a bit of an impossible situtation.  The rug has been pulled
from under me.

This sounds so cliche..  What I have been seeking is not there.  It
will probably not be found elsewhere either.  I am directed towards
"love what you do" instead of "do what you love".  Strongly aware of
the comfortable position I am in, in terms of worldly, practical
things, but also aware that the way in which I am making this fit is
eating at me.

EDIT: Today went from bad to worse.  Feeling quite depressed overall.
No hope - all despair.  No clarity.  I'm able to detach from it, but
it seems as this requires full detachment from everything.  Deep
sadness about not being able to get any satisfaction.  About not being
able to find harmony.  About clinging feeling of attachment and
judgement about not being able to function.

No where to go so I started concentrating on this general state of
being.  Blip followed almost immediately after.

And the day progresses, and the tone remains.  From this to learn that
not everything is meditation-induced dukkha.  Even if the sadness
remains, it doesn't have to start rolling.


Entry: interpretation is dangerous
Date: Fri Nov 23 23:43:08 EST 2012

feel a bit better.  seem to feel always better at night, when i
actually meditate (and to be fair, when the world is asleep and not
causing confrontation).

it is clear now that interpretation and "representational arrogance"
is at the heart of current impediment.  any idea of accomplishment is
a step in the wrong direction, since it seems to get a free pass to
becoming an un-investigated solidified enitity, instead of "wisdom
guiding to the here and now".

it really is only the here and now.  all the story around this
meditation business is really and only about getting you to shut up
and watch the moment.

that is all.



Entry: blipping
Date: Sat Nov 24 23:28:35 EST 2012

[1] http://www.dharmaoverground.org/web/guest/discussion/-/message_boards/message/2759574



Entry: From space to time
Date: Sun Nov 25 15:43:32 EST 2012

Reading [1][2] "Thoughts Without A Thinker: Psychotherapy From A
Buddhist Perspective".

Something I didn't hear before: mindfulness meditation allows one to
move from a "spatial self" to a "temporal self".  From "hunger" to
"breath".

[1] isbn://0465085857
[2] http://www.amazon.com/Thoughts-Without-Thinker-Psychotherapy-Perspective/dp/0465085857



Entry: Drop solidification
Date: Fri Nov 30 10:51:01 EST 2012

It seems that the path continues to being aware of more subtle forms
of solidification.  As Nikolai told me, even "equanimity" can be made
into an object.

Practice has been a bit slacking in the last week.  Lots of real world
stuff pulling me deep into self.  The flashes of centerlessness /
disappearing of overlay are very brief, but they happen throughout the
day.  I did have some progress following the "how does it feel in the
body" technique of Kenneth.  A sure way of success is to do the
following:

1. Identify solidification/embedding (If there is the slightest form
of persistent suffering/tension, embedding in self is going on as this
is what the persistence is built on.  Acknowledging this is the hard
part.  It seems that perception of self can only exist because this
very strong pull towards centralizing things.  Even just thinking
about letting that go can be painful.

2. Once it's clear that embedding is going on, simply concentrate on
the strongest (probably negative) feeling, and take it apart.  Once
that feedback loop is observed the persistence caused by the feedback
disappears.

Depending on the level of embedding, this process is very painful, and
if not pulled through all the way to the end, will leave you strongly
embedded.  However, once the link "breaks", the release can be
enormous.

( Embedding means "buying into the storyline".  My recurrent trip is
still anger/judgement mostly centered around the concept of
"fairness".  It's interesting how judgement and compassion can both
"cover" the same perceptual conditions, and can flip over into each
other. )


Entry: Nowhere to hide
Date: Sun Dec  2 23:08:09 EST 2012

Self is suffering.  Suffering is self.  A tower of unsatisfaction is
built on a cramped stomach.  That cramp is something to hold on to, to
solidify the injustice to self.  To shape its meaninglessness.


Entry: Practical problem
Date: Thu Dec  6 13:20:00 EST 2012

A problem I run into in daily life quite often, is the inability to
"open my mind" to a problem.  It is a tendency to block out certain
tasks by means of the sensation of boredom or despair, if there is no
apparent next step to take.  Practically this means an inability to
concentrate on something that is inherently very complex,
i.e. consists of a lot of specific, arcane details that all have to
line up, without any "promise of success".  I.e. "hopeless"
situations.

The sentiment of resistence or reluctance can be very strong.  As if
I'm avoiding a very strong pain, probably the pain of confusion.

I'd like to find a way to break through this blockage.  To find a way
to open up.  I remember what that feels like, and now I can clearly
see that this open space is not there; I just want to run away from
the task.



Entry: Consciousness and Primordial Awareness
Date: Fri Dec  7 23:44:09 EST 2012

See [1][2].

When I talk about "dropping out", I probably mean "primordial awareness".

Comment from cmarti[2]:

  The reason people (by "people" I'm pointing mainly to we vipassana
  practitioners) get confused is that we are told "everything is
  subject to the three characteristics." Which is, of course, true as
  regards all objects you encounter... until you encounter a certain
  POV. Primordial awareness just IS. Period. As far as I can tell, it
  is the veritable definition of timelessness, so any reference to
  time of any sort is meaningless in regard to it. So I understand
  Jackson's confusion. I was confused about this for a while,
  too. Since primordial awareness is not an object it just doesn't
  adhere to the doctrine of the three characteristics.

The timelessness and "just IS" properties are things I recognize from
my own experience.

"Things keep falling away.  I didn't even realize they where there
until they where gone." [3]

Total certainty in uncertainty[3] 


[1] http://kennethfolkdharma.wetpaint.com/page/Consciousness+and+Primordial+Awareness
[2] http://kennethfolkdharma.wetpaint.com/thread/3860323/Responses+to+%22Consciousness+and+Primordial+Awareness%22
[3] http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oJ902xaMxHk
[4] http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k0x6yciYtK0


Entry: What is wrong with Buddhism
Date: Sat Dec  8 18:51:40 EST 2012

Some lectures by Brian Ruhe.  They are a bit over the top for me
though..

[1] http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GDI6VYAMzIA
[2] http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q_0hgAfCiGI
[3] http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Pynsb4B6qHg
[4] http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hT2BshrF_pQ


Entry: Where?
Date: Sat Dec  8 23:43:45 EST 2012

I have no idea..  Mostly confused and embedded.  Tired, low energy.
Low tolerance to talk and conceptualization and absolutes.



Entry: Identify identification
Date: Sun Dec  9 21:54:16 EST 2012

After last couple of day's stuckness, things feel more in harmony in
today's sit.  Day was quite embedded.

Did a practice to identify identification, to see arising of the
center.  It can be subtle, and quite tricky.  While I can identify the
equanimous, centerless, direct perception, there are lots of patterns
that pull back into the identified mode.

The practice I've been doing recently is to find the moment.
Following the breath I find difficult, since there is so much space to
get distracted.  Using Daniel's "shooting aliens" approach is a good
way to move into a centerless mode - mind seems to get tired of
constantly switching back to "this" and it will eventually just stay
there, mostly - and from there is is possible to relax a bit and try
to catch the arising of center in a direct way or indireclty as
thought, investment, attachment, resentment, ...

There have been situations where I find it really difficult to not
fall into the trap.  One is writing emails and having conversations.
(And writing this log...)

Another one is walking the dogs.  Constant steering and subtle fear of
being outside pop up and create center.

EDIT: Reading the end of [1][2][3] p211.  It mentions:

   In the Tibetan tradition, according to the Buddhist scholar Robert
   Thurman, the best time to observe the self clearly is when we are
   in a state of _injured innocence_, when we have been insulted and
   think "How could she do this to me? I don't deserve to be treated
   that way".  It is this state, he says, that the "hard nut" of the
   self is best found; and the self cannot be truly understood, from a
   Buddhist perspective, until it is seen clearly as it appears.
   
Further on it mentions how in working through, experiencing emotions
is not the end point, it is to experience how they relate to the sense
of self, how they get identified with "me" that is the imporant point
of focus.


[1] isbn://0465085857
[2] http://www.amazon.com/Thoughts-Without-Thinker-Psychotherapy-Perspective/dp/0465085857
[3] http://books.google.com/books?id=i25Yfb-OSFMC&pg=PA211&lpg=PA211&dq=%22according+to+the+buddhist+scholar+robert+thurman%22&source=bl&ots=4eTVCRWHKN&sig=nvpduV8rc5htaBx8mBTMvQITRKY&hl=en&sa=X&ei=dzfGULm6M8PvygG7k4D4CQ&ved=0CC4Q6AEwAA#v=onepage&q=%22according%20to%20the%20buddhist%20scholar%20robert%20thurman%22&f=false


Entry: Deep jealousy
Date: Sun Dec  9 22:12:44 EST 2012

I've been exposing a deep form of jealousy.  Deep in a sense that it
is not easy to be aware of in the moment, but triggeres often, quite
obvious in retrospect, and wrecks havoc with state of calm.  It seems
mostly centered around lack of appreciation, and lack of social
status and integration.

It's interesting in that it seems to be quite strong, but hard to
observe!  Maybe not so odd in that strong emotions can take you on a
spin, but things like anger are easier to identify than a subtly
destructive feeling of jealousy.

Maybe this is the next hill to climb after learning to identify
resentment.  Looking back, this feeling of jealousy has been there for
a long time.  My first memory is 5th or 6th grade.  Tied very strongly
to deep-rooted beliefs about stereotypes ("people like that / people
like me").

It seems that the previous approach to this has been plain denial and
disregard.

EDIT: Jealoysy just arose out-of-the-blue watching[1], surprised me
but then was seen as it is and immediately disappeared.  It has a very
dark, destructive, greedy feel to it.

[1] http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7nUjBgZVaS0


Entry: batgap
Date: Mon Dec 10 21:41:17 EST 2012

Some interesting talks from Buddha at the Gas Pump.

[1] http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oJ902xaMxHk
[2] http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k0x6yciYtK0

[3] http://batgap.com/ilona-ciunaite-elena-nezhinsky/
[4] http://batgap.com/benjamin-smythe/


Entry: Remembering the humility
Date: Mon Dec 10 23:59:24 EST 2012

Awe!

[1] http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7nUjBgZVaS0


Entry: Triggers
Date: Wed Dec 12 10:33:28 EST 2012

These days it seems simpler to perceive the triggers/patterns related
to anger/resentment/yealousy/blame to kick in.  The patterns are still
very much there, but there seems to be a kind of "trigger-trigger"
that goes like "hey, this is a hook!".  It's amazing how powerful this
trigger-trigger can be: the triggered emotion dissipates immediately,
making room for a more balanced perspective.



Entry: Blip after "not-my-problem"
Date: Wed Dec 12 13:26:19 EST 2012

Saw appearance of the sensation of "ducking responsability" in clear
light.  Then a blip and a wide open field with the realization that
this is pointless/destructive followed by with bliss and happiness and
laughter.

Most of my recent trigger-triggers are about similar things:
interrupting the thought pattern that something "isn't my fault" so I
should care or do anything.  A tricky one!


Entry: Mornings are different
Date: Thu Dec 13 08:54:21 EST 2012

Very much embedded..  It takes some time to wake up in the ordinary
sense before gaining access to the kind of moment-to-moment bare
attention that has become clear over the last year.

Patterns.  This morning some deep patterns from the past triggered.



Entry: Depressed, anxious state
Date: Sat Dec 15 20:33:00 EST 2012

Finding myself in a fairly depressed, depleted state.  Seems mostly
induced by some recent unexpected, disturbing news.  Been
experimenting a bit with observing this state, and have spent time
detached and (mostly) attached to it.

It's embodyment is mostly in the stomach.  It feels like anxiety.

The main quality seems to be dispair, about mostly everything.
Inability to focus and maintain.  Absence of good ideas.


Entry: Kranti Ananta - Buddha at the Gas Pump Interview
Date: Tue Dec 18 14:25:05 EST 2012

[1]:

  It all comes home for truth.  It wants to be free.  Once this
  recognition is here, then everything that is not free in the system
  will come for this clarification.

  Any story about somebody else is a me-story.

[1] http://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=endscreen&NR=1&v=QZfwd6NeHhE


Entry: Better
Date: Tue Dec 18 14:25:21 EST 2012

As triggers get resolved one by one, I feel in a better place.  Still
pretty much conditioned on the presence of hope and the absence of
unpredictability it seems..


Entry: Ben Smythe
Date: Tue Dec 18 22:19:46 EST 2012

Guy's got the gift of words[1]

  Curiosity is the cure to insecurity.

  I highly recommend to investigate the belief in other, and the
  feeling of other in your physiology.  Where's the other?

  Is there something you have to hide from people in order for them to
  give you what you want?


[1] http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vsEtw5iXmx4



Entry: Dealing with other's ego stuff
Date: Wed Dec 19 12:57:57 EST 2012

My own mental self-chatter has reduced a lot in the last year (I'm
talking about the tip of the iceberg, the most obvious part. I realize
that what I'm doing here is still chatter..).  Only big shocks seem to
trigger it these days.  However, there is plenty of confrontation with
other people's meaningless tip-of-the-iceberg chatter.  It gives me
plenty of aversion.

How to deal with that?
 
t's an interesting test case, since it both has the dualizing concept
of "other" and a strong judgement of how things should / should not
be, i.e. disagreement with reality.

How to deal with the dualized part of realization = the construction
of concepts following direct experience of the onion-peeling process?

This is a good indication of how attached the mind is to forming
opinions about everything, even if it is about "not forming opinions".


Entry: Happy days
Date: Wed Dec 19 23:52:00 EST 2012

Interestingly, I am feeling a lot lighter these past 2 days.  Could be
conditioned things.  Spoke to family after getting some bad news, and
getting some good news after the bad news.  But I feel more connected
to people somehow.  As if some darkness has lifted.

I'm experiencing more conceptual clarity about the dharma work.  As if
some paradoxes have disappeared.  Some things are now more obiously
labelled as "constructed".  The self is created by the collection of
_pointers_ of identification "x is mine", not the place they point to,
which is empty.

Anyways, just word games.

Something that has left a mark is Ben Smythe's radiant personality
after watching some of his videos.


Entry: Adyashanti
Date: Sun Dec 23 23:27:54 EST 2012

Enlightenment is not believing your own thoughts.

[1] http://batgap.com/adyashanti/


Entry: Cycles
Date: Sat Jan  5 23:57:55 EST 2013

Life is cycles.  Currently fairly embedded.  Feels mostly like
obsession with a new endeavor and resentment or denial of ongoing
stressors.  My sense of reality is off.  Might be the uncertain times,
but I feel different in a fearful sense, not very stable.

Meditation is hard.  Hard to actually sit for longer than 10 minutes
and stay focused.


Entry: Suffering is identification
Date: Mon Jan  7 23:54:54 EST 2013

and identification is suffering.

It's getting a little scary, as if there are two ways of living life.
One identified with "stuff", the other free from it.  Pain is the
teacher.  Pain brings up identification and story, like nothing else,
through resentment and self-pity.  When it is most prominent, it is
most recognizable.  Once recognized, it is easily dropped, or drops
itself; breaks open.

Pain.  Suffering.  Snap.  Oh, that's what it was like.
Then time passes and things just snap back into plain old me.


Entry: Impermanence and Not Self
Date: Sat Jan 12 22:37:51 EST 2013

Last week I've seen a lot of this pattern: deep embedding in stress
and worry, then a very sudden dropout.  Like today.  Much of the
stress is people and opinions and patterns..

Reading [1], after the "impermanence" part. I had focus on the Not
Self characteristic I looked at impermance and I saw a shift more
clearly happening as described in MCTB "the thee doors"[2].  It might
be a good excercise to try to see the 3 doors more clearly.  From the
description, I can only recognize the suffering door:

    The suffering door relates directly to the mind releasing its
    fixated hold on the whole of relative reality and allowing it to
    fall away, leaving awareness to discover itself.


[1] http://www.dharmaoverground.org/web/guest/dharma-wiki/-/wiki/Main/Hurricane+Ranch+DhO+First+Gathering+Transcript
[2] http://www.dharmaoverground.org/web/guest/dharma-wiki/-/wiki/Main/MCTB%20The%20Three%20Doors



Entry: Proper sit
Date: Thu Jan 17 02:56:47 CET 2013

Proper sit after a cuple of hazy days.  Didn't do much except for some
on-the-road vipassana while traveling.

30 min sit.  First 10 minutes where very noisy.  Harsh vibrations.
Not so great concentration.  Second 10 minutes where intentional
samatha with focus on pleasant sensation and direction to what I think
is 5th jhana.  I think I can now clearly see the transition from 4th
to 5th as the appearance of darkness and falling away of some body
sensations giving rise to a very "absorbed" feeling.  This darkness
might be related to turning the eyes back into the eye sockets, as
there is a clear sensation of some eye muscles relaxing/stretching.
This can trigger a blip.  After 5th I think I touched 6th: there was a
clear center to the experience (watcher?).  Last 10 minutes where
vipassana, with directed focus on the sense of self, which lead to a
dropout experience.

Interest in writing disappeared.  Just wanted to sit, be.  Future has
no meaning, or no representation.  It simply doesn't exist.  Future is
a thought, and this thought can cause the re-instantiation of self.
Paying attention to the sensation of absence of that sensation of self
after a dropout makes it easier to see when it re-appears, and it is
usually a thought triggered by some kind of experience.  Looking at a
clock brings up the concept of time, which then triggers other
thoughts, e.g. have-tos, to-dos, "after meditation I'm gonig to..."



Entry: Social programming
Date: Thu Jan 17 03:07:16 CET 2013

Social contact pushes me deeply into embedded state.  Very hard to see
through that sensation of aversion of "wanting to leave" some kind of
social gathering with a group I didn't pick-and-choose myself.

Since it is so strong it might be interesting to work on some
techniques to turn this into an advantage.  It is very unpleasant,
moreover because the idea that "tuning out" into vipassana is not
appropriate.  It doesn't have to be like that.  It can just be tuning
into conversation, shared emotional states...


Entry: Shift
Date: Thu Jan 17 04:42:02 CET 2013

Shift after about half an hour in the bed, trying to go to sleep but
failing, so alternating between concentration and insight practice.
There was some attachment to getting up and surfing the web, so I took
that desire as an object which created an interesting experience,
probably a dropout.

Experience is overshadowed by what happened about 10 minutes ago when
I turned on the light and got online on my phone to read a part of
MCTB.  While reading Daniel's website, out of the blue, there was a
shift which felt quite profound.  Looking at my hands the difference
between this and that disappeared in a strong way, leaving a pure and
calm now with profound feeling of beauty.  It reminds me of the first
couple of times I had a dropout experience somewhere in march/april
last year.

I wanted to stay in bed but thought it might be good to at least
record the occurance and the associated feeling of profoundness and
deep calm.


Entry: Dishonesty
Date: Thu Jan 24 14:18:16 CET 2013

Dishonesty disappears in the face of death.  Plenty of
self-referencing going on, with most of it being quite subtle.  These
days are fairly embedded, strongly exposed by death-realated suffering
and the observation of how it affects self and the display of self in
others.


Entry: Fear of death and loss
Date: Fri Jan 25 16:17:22 CET 2013

Fear of loss (of loved ones) creates a tension between holding on to
"my life", and letting go of that hold, when things are going well,
i.e. when there is a lot of enjoyment in "my life".

It's easier when "my life" is going badly (the shallow attachments
like work, money, things going your way...) but there are no
inter-personal issues (deep attachments).  It's easy to just swap in
the shallow attachments and replace them by deep ones, to get a good
feeling anyway.  This is what is called "relativering" in Dutch, or
putting things in perspective.

Dropping of fundamental, deep attachment is different.  It requires a
much more profound form of surrender.

Up to now it seems to be only triggered when everything is going
badly, both shallow and deep attachments.  Only then the mind seems to
let go.

The pattern I saw this week is replacing unfulfilled deep attachment
with shallow attachment, which clearly feels dangerous and unbalanced.



Entry: Low tide
Date: Sun Jan 27 01:01:28 CET 2013

Weak mindfulness.  Deep embedding.  Having trouble completing a full
30 minute sit.  Being swept away with thoughts of "after meditation",
"I'm done with this crap.".

At some point I set out to start afresh, to try to isolate the stages
of insight, starting with mind and body, to clearly see when thinking
starts.  Seeing body isn't so hard, but seeing mind is harder, seeing
the onset of thoughts doesn't work well.  Current observation gets
interrupted by blinks that seem to even be linked to eye saccades or
de-focusing.

I'm having a lot of fun working these days.  There is a strong
attachment to the stream of little victories that's going on right
now which makes it hard to step out of that roller coaster.

Maybe this is not a time for formal meditation.  Maybe throughout
mindfulness is a better approach.

Reading MCTB 7 factors[1] again.  Starts with mindfulness.  Starts
with noting.  Maybe it's time to go back to the exact instructions:

    The practice is this: make a quiet, mental one-word note of
    whatever you experience in each moment. Try to stay with the
    sensations of breathing, noting these quickly as rising (as many
    times as the sensations of the breath rising are experienced) and
    then falling in the same way. This could also be considered
    fundamental insight practice instructions. When the mind wanders,
    notes might include thinking, feeling, pressure, tension,
    wandering, anticipating, seeing, hearing, cold, hot,
    pain, pleasure, etc. Note these sensations one by one as they
    occur and then return to the sensations of breathing.


[1] http://www.dharmaoverground.org/web/guest/dharma-wiki/-/wiki/Main/MCTB%20Mindfulness%20as%20First%20Factor%20of%20Enlightenment



Entry: Success is demotivating
Date: Tue Jan 29 11:13:57 CET 2013

Interesting how reaching a certain goal can make you uninterested in
all that lead to it, while failure makes you focus on the process
more.  The thing seems to be to forget success as fast as possible
(just like failure) and continue the process.



Entry: Lost
Date: Tue Jan 29 22:09:42 CET 2013

I'm lost. Can't focus. Can't find the breath.

Maybe this needs a little more goal-oriented approach.  Following
Nikolai's advice: focus on the "selfing", to let the drop out guide
the process.  Look closer at where it is important.

This also seems to be heavily "context-tagged".  I.e. I'm experiencing
a dropout right now, just by writing the paragraph before.



Entry: Mindfulness throughout the day
Date: Sat Feb  2 22:17:59 CET 2013

Since I can't practice on the cusion, I'm doing mindfulness excercises
any time I am able and think of it.  Focus on the "selfing process",
the identificiation and its effect the arising of tension.

Current challenges are identification with anxiety / agoraphobia.
Went to conference and by the end of the day I was getting pretty
stuck in awkwardness, which seems to be some kind of non-present
autopilot behavior for avoiding the discomfort of being amongst a
large crowd that's not just anonymous (i.e. no really there anyway..)



Entry: Silly sense of accomplishment
Date: Sat Feb  2 22:24:17 CET 2013

It's like I want to give things to the world, but the world doesn't
want them.  Maybe I need to turn that around.  I want to make things
that somehow trigger a sense of awe in myself, and then want to get
the same thing from others.  Look ma, no hands!



Entry: Social anxiety
Date: Sat Feb  2 22:28:23 CET 2013

Weird how it shifts perspective.  After such a busy day, I just want
to go home and be quiet.  And the first hour or so is really good that
way.  Then comes the emptyness.

Disconnect from the world, disconnect from the being.

I think it's time to self diagnose as serious dark night syndrome..


Entry: Shinzen Young on the Category Theory metaphore
Date: Tue Feb  5 00:47:21 CET 2013

[1] http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nSobyZjJSvs


Entry: Shinzen Young on turning off attention
Date: Tue Feb  5 01:07:01 CET 2013

Paraphrased: I don't know what to do with my meditation.  Confusion is
good.  The part that controls attention is maximally activated at that
time.

- Let whatever happens, happen.

- When you're aware of an intention to control your attention, drop
  that intention.

If noting makes you racy, try to do nothing.  If do nothing makes you
spacy, try noting.


[1] http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cZ6cdIaUZCA



Entry: Shift
Date: Wed Feb  6 00:44:27 CET 2013

Profound shift.
Hard to describe.
Mushroom cloud?

Some images of "Sinterklaas and Zwarte Piet" and how it once seemed so
real, but is obviously not in correspondence with reality, i.e. my dad
throwing candy in the room, wearing a black glove and sleeved vest,
showing only his arm around the corner or through the door, and us as
kids being totally surprised and in awe about what happened.

Feeling a bit more normal now.  Seems like it was a samatha thingy.

EDIT: After the shift I was completely blissed out.  Today (day after)
felt normal though.

EDIT: This was as a consequence to the do-nothing techique.  "Zooming
out of self".


Entry: Working with "Ick" ~ Stephanie Nash
Date: Thu Feb  7 01:08:07 CET 2013

[1] http://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL845240BD38B47406



Entry: Upset.. inevitably the self returns, right?
Date: Fri Feb  8 23:29:49 CET 2013

[1] http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6kkjMD8T8VM&list=PLpWI1yEIe1nESIiX5PpIrFK1URX0BQcx8&index=4


Entry: Sahaja samadhi
Date: Sat Feb  9 00:43:09 CET 2013

How to get back?  By not trying to get back.  By completely affirming
the re-arising of the personal self.

[1] http://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=player_detailpage&v=uvFfpSl06r4#t=1941s
[2] http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sahaja


Entry: Waves in my left foot
Date: Sat Feb  9 00:58:17 CET 2013

Weird things..  In "passing through" a concentrated state, the last
few days I feel a tingling wave in my left leg moving into my left
foot where it causes a jittery, quite pronounced "thrill".



Entry: Sailor Bob Adamson, Non Duality Melbourne Style
Date: Mon Feb 11 22:37:32 CET 2013

(paraphrased)

  If you know that you can stop seeking, the task is then to try to
  see what is obscuring the direct realization of being already there.

  What can you say without a thought?

  Dzogchen translation is "the great perfection".  Non-conceptual
  awareness.

  The mind doesn't want simplicity.


[1] http://www.youtube.com/watch?NR=1&feature=endscreen&v=zYemUTExOpI
[2] http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dzogchen


Entry: Days vs. nights
Date: Tue Feb 12 11:24:40 CET 2013

I still wake up embedded, and deeply so.  The night doesn't have the
burdon of "things to do", leaving more room for simplicity.  How to
see through the obscurity of the chop wood, carry water?  Is it
because all of these dayly tasks are cognitive loads instead of
physical loads (chop, carry) ?


Entry: Before sit
Date: Sat Feb 16 23:20:31 CET 2013

Not much formal sitting in these days.  Mostly inbetween mindfulness.
Mostly focusing on arising of "thick slice" embedding, identification.

Some mindfulness before bed, but I feel I'm stuck in a single stage,
mostly fear.  Monsters watching in the dark.  Pretty strong images
even.  All remind me of "thatrical, directed horror" used in movies,
not deep, dark, evil, "real" horror.

Sounds like dark night, fear stage.  That's about it.

Every time I do get into directed concentration, it goes deep very
quickly.

So let's see.  Going to do a 30 minute formal sit.

--

Love is giving it all away and becoming a world without suffering.

Weird sit.  At three minutes I was calmed down, proceeded with
choiceless awareness and noting.  Saw many things, confusion,
equanimity, fear and misery.  All very unstable, up to a point where
there was much fear, then remebered love and focused on love and
things grew bigger and exploded up to me verbalizing "wow".

During this process of explosion, the words I wrote down above came
originally from "Love is giving something and expecting nothing in
return but seeing the world's suffering lessen (as reward)." but
became bigger, more encompassing, deeper until there was a deep deep
resonance with the idea that love IS giving to the everything that is
me.  Something like that.  Trippy stuff.

Moving from "reward system" to "obviously just giving to the
all-encompassing center of good things".

Yep, going nuts now :)






Entry: Dharma doing me
Date: Thu Feb 21 21:36:59 CET 2013

More and more there are strange experiences, clearly different from
ordinary life, where it seems as if something just comes up from
inside, blossoms open, takes me on a ride and leaves me sitting there
a bit baffled and humbled.

It's all getting a bit hard to describe.  Less under control.  Feels
more like insanity.  On the outside it all seems fine, but the inside
is full on swinging between different ways of looking.  Necker cube
strobe..


Entry: Meditation is babysitting awareness
Date: Fri Feb 22 21:23:28 CET 2013

[1] http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FOvftIwT0Q4


Entry: Why does working feel normal?
Date: Fri Feb 22 21:33:22 CET 2013

I.e. being absorbed in some (mental) task?  And in contrast, why does
sitting still feel so strange? As if nothing is as it seems?


Entry: Zen and the Brain
Date: Sat Feb 23 10:30:50 CET 2013

[1] http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vEIXijQctlQ


Entry: Power of joy
Date: Sun Feb 24 22:08:57 CET 2013

Got stuck in a rut.  Deeply embedded.  What seems to help in
situations like this is to see the delight and joy in other people.
It is contagious :)

Anyays, one of the things that seems to happen is a self-centered
focos on self.  A not quite seeing of the identification process, but
pseudo-seeing it, constructing the observation of it.

Got in a bit of a dark space.  Raw, unsatisfactory.  Then I got
absorbed into some head stuff.  Did a little 10 minute sit.  Going to
do a little more before bed.


Entry: 3 speed
Date: Thu Feb 28 23:54:42 CET 2013

1. Mindfulness of the body (vipassana)
2. To whom is this happening? (advaita vedanta[2], or Zen, Hua Tou[3])
3. Recognize essential nature of mind, what is already done

Go to third gear first and downshift when it doesn't get traction.

[1] http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WE6URCUmKIg
[2] http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Advaita_Vedanta
[3] http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hua_Tou


Entry: Fear of death - to be wrong is the death of an idea
Date: Fri Mar  8 21:57:40 EST 2013

Identification with ideas.  Quite profound actually.

[1] http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xvcI5m1-aQ4



Entry: Sleep strengthens ego
Date: Mon Mar 11 21:47:52 EDT 2013

Something that popped in my mind after waking up from a nap today.
Sleep seems to cause a snap back into embedding with strong, solid
ego.


Entry: Forced into identity by social contact
Date: Tue Mar 12 09:41:03 EDT 2013

One of those things that has puzzled me for my entire life.  It seems
that (maybe due to prolonged isolation?) two distinct centers of
identification have formed: one from being alone, maybe shaped by
desires and "free" thought patterns and one from being among people,
maybe shaped by feedback, i.e. the perception of personality projected
back by other people.

In the deconstruction process of the last 1.5 year, it is mostly the
former that has been driven a bit into the background, or is taken
less seriously: it is now more clear that bouts of identification are
simply that - identification - and not me.  However, in the presence
of other people this is much harder to identify.

I guess the same goes here as for the other manifestation: practice.
Practice observation of the construct arising in those particular
situations.


Entry: DhO fav threads
Date: Sun Mar 17 22:20:40 EDT 2013
http://dharmaoverground.org/web/guest/discussion/-/message_boards/message/3015265#_19_message_4034527



Entry: Blip classification
Date: Thu Mar 28 01:57:14 EDT 2013

Kenneth Folk on DhO [1]:

  The quick, clean blip is a dukkha (suffering) cessation. The
  smoother, slippery ones are anatta (no-self). No-self cessations can
  be extended to long periods of time. Dukkha cessations are always
  momentary as far as I know.

  The third door to nibbana is the anicca (impermanence) door. ...
  And it can be extended for several seconds at a time, possibly
  more. But it is unlike the other two types of cessations in that it
  feels like you are being quickly and smoothly vibrated in and out of
  nibbana.


It's the first description I read about the three doors that I can
actually relate to.  For me, the fast blips usually come when focusing
on the inherent "restlessness", it makes sense this is the suffering
door.  The slippery, gradual cessation I recognize too.  It can take
up to say 10-15 minutes, and it is a conscious one.  I.e. there is
"primordial" awareness.

The ipmermanence ones I think I saw too.  At least I recognize the
vibrating in and out of something, and the tricky nature of it.


[1] http://www.dharmaoverground.org/web/guest/discussion/-/message_boards/message/101334



Entry: 3 doors
Date: Mon Apr  1 10:54:39 EDT 2013

More about the doors.  Impermanence is scary.  I think I saw it today,
trying to look for the no-self door, which I haven't seen for a while,
trying to ignore the suffering door, which happens a lot by itself by
just entering concentration on immediate suffering with the intention
to see it clearly to realize its inherent transitory nature, and its
being kept in existence or constant retriggering by attachment.

Anyways, trying to put words to this or to interpret, but what seems
to be going on is that I'm in 1st path review, where the suffering
door is clear, but the no-self door and the impermanence door are not.
Not sure why this is taking so long, as I seem to have rushed to first
path, but after that got kind of stuck.  It seems as if the thing to
focus on is impermanence, not no-self.  Impermanence is the "scary"
door.  That is clear.

From reading [1] again and comparing it with Kenneth's from last post,
I'm confused.  Too much interpretation...

[1] http://www.dharmaoverground.org/web/guest/dharma-wiki/-/wiki/Main/MCTB%20The%20Three%20Doors



Entry: Not following the swirl
Date: Wed Apr  3 16:31:10 EDT 2013

Tried to watch what is there with the eyes closed, and found that
"following" the visual spots and swirls is like following a thought
that goes on a tangent.  Constantly coming back to the center allows
the swirls to die out, instead of them taking awareness into the point
where they disappear and produce confusion.

Once I started to look at the beginning of the swirl with a very high
frequency, a great bliss came over me and a popping into awareness of
the mode I was seeking, coming from a very uncomfortable, fearful,
discontented, untrusting state.

Thoughts are very visual.  Maybe that is a way to look at them.

I also noticed that something is situated behind my right eye.  Some
blind spot, in the sense of visual representation.

I've been having a lot of fearful awakenings lately (literally, from
sleep).  Coming back to reality and feeling out-of-place with life, as
if it is all a dream.  This combined with fear and confusion.


It took me a couple of days to bring up the courage to sit.  It really
takes a deep dive into the pain to see it comes from attachment.
There is knowing this rationally, and there is knowing it
experientially.  Only the latter can make it dissipate.


I found what was blocking after about a 15 minute sit.  There was a
stream of something dragging me along.  Once this dragging of
attention was seen, the point of "departure" could be seen more
clearly, and the dragging eventually disappeared.  Seeing it took away
its power.

Funny how ideas aren't really ideas in a verbal sense.  Seems my
memory and representation form really is quite visual, taking
analogies of physical processes to represent concepts instead of words
and sentences.  That realization might help future practice a bit.



Entry: Stuckness
Date: Mon Apr  8 00:31:33 EDT 2013

Looks like this is the end of about a week of stuckness, with a couple
of bright spots here and there.  Last couple of days were particularly
bad.  Hard to say what shook me out of it..  It happened after a
conversation which had the frustration as a subject.




Entry: Accepting depression
Date: Sun Apr 28 12:12:42 EDT 2013

Maybe "depression" isn't the right term, though I'm experiencing this
pattern triggered by expectation and future-oriented thinking that
seems to kick me into a mode of dispair, where I do not take interest
in the ongoing unfolding of events, but just want to run away from it
all, taking refuge deep inside a "me" that is perceived separate from
the world or the image of the world.

It is a state that makes little sense.  It is viral in the sense that
it is self-stabilizing.  Keeping the focus on the internal gloom and
doom really seems to create something enjoyable.  The "woe is me"
thing..



Entry: ReWire (iPhone)
Date: Mon Apr 29 15:47:33 EDT 2013

Just note gone.

[1] http://www.buddhistgeeks.com/2013/04/bg-283-rewiring-meditation-for-the-digital-age/
[2] http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=L-7LXHjGHfM
[3] http://rewireapp.com/


Entry: EEG stuff
Date: Mon Apr 29 16:02:45 EDT 2013

[1] http://www.interaxon.ca/muse/
[2] http://insanebraintrain.blogspot.com/2012_07_01_archive.html
[3] https://docs.google.com/file/d/0B9IyLjPYAVCYYmQ4YjY3NGYtMGQ0NC00N2RhLTgxZDAtY2ZlOGE4YWExYjY0/edit
[4] http://www.cns-wellness.com/brain-based-interventions/tcds
[5] http://www.buddhistgeeks.com/2013/04/bg-283-rewiring-meditation-for-the-digital-age/


Entry: Day creates duality
Date: Mon Apr 29 23:09:18 EDT 2013

Something is wrong with the day.  I can't point the finger at it, but
it has something to do with expectation, about how things should be,
and distraction.


Entry: Discontinuity of thought
Date: Tue Apr 30 18:08:06 EDT 2013

Post-calamity[1].

[1] http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/U._G._Krishnamurti



Entry: There's something about the sound of fans
Date: Thu May  2 00:17:47 EDT 2013

Maybe because the noise masks out anything else..
It seems to attract jhana-like states.


Entry: Ebb and flow
Date: Sun May  5 19:08:55 EDT 2013

Mood swings.  Fear.  Not much stability.  Every time the high hits I'm
thinking: it's actually alright, next time I'm not going to be sliding
into the deep again.  And then a bit later I just slide in.

Part of the exercise is to look at those good times, and to see the
attachment in the feeling of detachment.  All this, so circular..



Entry: Ego death
Date: Wed May  8 13:04:37 EDT 2013

Breaking through that layer of embedding when it is strong, is a very
painful experience.  The bottom line really is attachment, but it can
be so blinding that only the pain it causes can be seen.

Usually there seems to be something or other, some kind of "should be"
that prevents the tether to self to be released.  Once it happens, a
broad feeling of wellness arises.

I wonder, what are the triggers?  Because I am suffering a lot these
days.  Nothing is going according to plan, and I don't find joy.  Deep
in the dark night?

Ambition only leads to suffering.




So, is there anything I can do next time?  Once inside, it seems that
nothing can really help.  Once it is seen that surrender is the only
way out, it comes by itself.

How to persist in giving up?


Entry: Fruition in dream
Date: Thu May 16 10:33:26 EDT 2013

I had a fruition in a dream last night.  Was dreaming I was driving a
car to the next town, sun was shining.  Pretty much a scene from the
day before.  All of a suddon, everything opened up.  It had that same
quality of constricted to open, self to no-self but it was quite
intense.



Entry: Dharma Integration: getting overwhelmed
Date: Thu May 16 13:00:57 EDT 2013

How to live life?  The key element in my day-to-day experience seems
to be getting overwhelmed.  Let's dissect that a bit.

It is a feeling of confusion and despair when a lot of conflicting
stimuli enter the field of experience.  It is always attached to some
kind of "hard constraint", a desire or expectation that is deemed
important or even essential.  It has that element of fear of death
associated to it: there will be terror if the particular constraint is
not satisfied.

The major element here is money: managing the risk of running out
without getting into too many other undesirable situations.




The main idea that pops up in a situation of being overwhelmed, is
"how to make it go away?".  The trick seems to be to not make it go
away, but to accept it.  Accept the impossibility of satisfying all
constraint.  The imposibility of avoiding certain events in the
future.  Trust the ability to deal with situations as they present
themselves.


Entry: Jealousy
Date: Thu May 23 20:13:17 EDT 2013

Of the pride family.  An interesting sensation.  It's been a while
since I felt it, but it sure is strong when it hits.


Entry: Beginner's mind
Date: Mon May 27 12:43:05 EDT 2013

Starting over.  Looks like I was really getting mislead by the idea of
"having" stream entry.  The reality is, getting review fruitions is
not straightforward.  I do get blips a lot, but the conscious "ego
drop" moments are more rare.

I had been slacking.  Picking up a more strict meditation schedule
does seem to help a lot.  There's a bunch of "stuff" going around
these days, so plenty of turbulence to watch.

Identification is strong.  The process of how identification "snaps
in" becomes noticable.  It's like putting on a VR helmet, being
tele-ported into a different reality.

It becomes more clear that focus on the present field of sensations is
where it's at.  Most prominently, this seems to install a defence
agains being swept away by thoughts and (much stronger) worries.

I also saw curiosity as a "greedy" sensation.  It is a happy greedy
sensation though, not a dark greedy one.




Entry: Long commute
Date: Tue Jun  4 23:19:45 EDT 2013

Practice while driving?

  Every time I drive I do awareness of the whole visual field
  simultaneously, it's a really good practice for driving and walking
  because you usually become more coordinated and effective but also
  supremely relaxed and alert.

[1] http://www.dharmaoverground.org/web/guest/discussion/-/message_boards/message/3810520?_19_threadView=flat



Entry: Moving forward?
Date: Mon Jun 10 10:12:57 EDT 2013

Strong dark night episode.  Very strong resentment about current life
situation.  Low energy.  General depressed state.

Did a lot of meditation the last couple of days, and the general
gloomy feeling does lift when piercing through that thick, thick layer
of self.

Shifts occur when this layer is pierced.  An incredible source of
peace is below that surface of strong identification.

I've been hunting identification, with a little success.  Staring
directly at how the process of identification arises seems a good
approach.

Main idea that keeps holding strong: if there is any tension, there is
something in the field of experience that is not seen clearly, acting
as an unconscious anchor.


Entry: The Yogi Toolbox: Discerning The Three Perceptions
Date: Mon Jun 10 11:02:41 EDT 2013

[1] http://thehamiltonproject.blogspot.com/2012/09/the-yogi-toolbox-discerning-three.html



Entry: Task-aversion
Date: Mon Jun 10 11:08:44 EDT 2013

Very strong aversion to any kind of action being perceived as coming
from "outside".  No problem with acting on ideas that come from "inside".

The split is causing a lot of suffering.  It is easy to abstract what
is going on, but hard to step out of it.

It is remarkable how thick the aversion-resentment can get.  Piercing
through it takes time and creates a lot of space.  Also, it seems that
any amount of unconsciousness allows it to be re-instated quite
quickly.



Entry: Motivation and Curiosity
Date: Thu Jun 13 12:43:22 EDT 2013

Lot's of mind states come and go on a seemingly arbitrary basis.
Apart from the negative ones such as despair and aversion, the same is
true for motivation and curiosity.

Lately the patterns related to "have to" have become more clear.
Aversion is a prime one.  Also some form of greed for approval is
quite prominent.

It is also aversion to not being able to control the curiosity
vs. aversion wave that causes a lot of grief.

I wonder if the aversion is necessary to just take a break and let the
mind re-organize itself.  A "too much information" safety valve.


Entry: Not to change
Date: Sun Jun 23 16:06:38 EDT 2013

From [1]:

  Most people spend nearly all their energy trying not to change. This
  is what the philosopher [sic] William James meant when he wrote the
  minds main function was to be a fortress for protecting your ego
  from reality. When the mind has to accommodate a new fact, James
  argued, it doesnt settle on the change to its model of reality that
  is most likely to reflect reality. It protects the fortress,
  calculating the smallest possible modification to its bulwarks that
  can account for the new fact.

[1] https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=5928907



Entry: Anger is in the lips
Date: Sun Jun 30 20:17:09 EDT 2013

Last couple of weeks I've had a tremor in the right part of my upper
lip. It is quite similar to the tremor in my left foot where my toes
fork off, which started about 4 months ago.

I notice a subtle sensation of trying to control it.  When I let it go
it goes stronger and leads to something that feels like anger /
reaction to injustice.

I've been experiencing perceptual shifts - suddon drops into "now"
interleaving current intense mental work.  Accompanied by a sensation
of expectation and dread.  Something about to happen that might be
significant.

That feeling of being on the verge of something is strong.  Sometimes
it dissolves in what feels like a near miss, accompanied with some
relaxation and shift in perspective - e.g. things feeling more normal,
at ease.


Interpretation: I'm expecting something to happen.  The only thing
that makes or lets something happen is to dive into pure sensation:
identify the "hold on" thought or expectation and let it free.  Mostly
this letting go is just scary.  Sometimes it pops a little, which
might be another review fruition.  Nothing really changes in
perception, just a reminder of the distinction between pure sensation
and embedding in a flow of time, and "life".

Still in first path review looks like.



Entry: It's not possible to progress when tied down
Date: Sun Jul 14 17:31:24 EDT 2013

Meaning, even with past realization, it is still possible to "choose"
the attachment, or be tricked by it.  ( Somehow it does feel like a
choice, avoiding the pain jolt of letting go, of going through a
little death. )

In a practical sense I've had a couple of weeks of deep embedding in
work and a buildup of impossible expectation that pushed me near a
breaking point, making it hard to ignore.  I spent more time actively
meditating, even though the act of sitting was very hard and I did
give up frequently, and even though my mind went all over the place.
After two days of a little active meditation and a lot of ongoing
"monitoring" of the arising of stress jolts and inner dialogue, I do
feel a little more free from it.  As if I've come back to the point
from where actual progress is possible; the life stuff had been
clouding this.

There is a great peace in the moment, but also a great sadness, a
mourning of not choosing that which is now known to be unsatisfactory.
A great void remains, a lot of space to fill up.



Entry: Fear and anger
Date: Mon Jul 22 13:37:19 EDT 2013

I've had a twitch in my upper lip for a couple of weeks.  Yesterday I
zoomed into that, and it turned into a full upper lip curl remeniscent
of strong sensations of anger/disguist.

Zooming in lead to a strong focus on anger and hate, very antagonistic
state of mind.  Noticed some temptation to give in to the anger.
Tried to observe it, but noticed a strong tendency to want to control
it, i.e. not to give in and project love into the darkness.

It was all quite intense.  I sat staring out the window for a bit
afterward.

Earlier this weekend I also noticed some disproportional
frustration/anger release.

Interpretation: seems I'm blocking a natural flow of anger out of fear
for where it takes me.  Acceptingt that core sensation of anger is
hard, as there seems to be always some element of control or fear to
have the anger take over.  I don't trust the anger out of fear it will
damage things.




Entry: Interest / Boredom
Date: Thu Jul 25 10:17:48 EDT 2013

Interesting how that mechanism works.  Makes me want to investigate
the relation between process-oriented attachment (enjoying a work
process) vs. goal-oriented attachment.  Often a lot of suffering is
removed when the latter is transformed into the former.  But what
makes a process enjoyable?


Entry: Learning to love confusion
Date: Thu Jul 25 11:33:52 EDT 2013

This is a tough one.  Confusion is very uncomfortable, and discomfort
seems to be directly proportional to the importance of the task that
caused the confusion in the first place.

Maybe it's the death of misconceptions that actually causes the pain;
i.e. the realization that a particular set of ideas can not be
trusted.  It is like betrayal.



Entry: Off-cushion
Date: Wed Jul 31 15:23:39 EDT 2013

I'm noticing more the effect of meditation off-cusion.  Sitting
sessions aren't too spectacular, but if I sit more during one or two
days, interesting experiences pop up during the days after that.

Most recognizable is self drop-out, not as spectacular as the first
couple of times, but pretty clear as it is contrasted with
hyper-absorbed goal-driven work-day stuff.  Only lasts a couple of
seconds.


Entry: Going off the rails..
Date: Sun Sep  1 12:28:12 EDT 2013

Fear is filling my days.  Still hard to acknowledge it.  Nothing to
fear but fear itself, so true..

Intentially accepting fear exposes some of its allies:
procrastination, and reluctance to slow down and breathe.



Entry: Growing up
Date: Wed Sep 11 00:27:37 EDT 2013

I find myself in the awkward position of realizing that a lot of my
current suffering is created by desire for things i cannot have, but
not being able to move past that.

The previous bane was defintely resentment, which has faded a bit.  I
no longer blame anyone for anything, at least not for long periods of
time.  This is now intercepted more easily.

However, the self-blame is still there.  The sensation by itself is
harder to take serious now, but it seems to be a symptom of a strong
self-centered view.  As if body-mind is resisting against insight, ego
death.

Time to die again.
And again
And again
Until it feels natural?



Entry: OK because I can't do anything about it
Date: Thu Sep 26 17:30:50 EDT 2013

Identified one of the central traits of worry: I worry because there
*might* be something I can do to get the thing I want.  Once there is
nothing to be done about it, acceptance is a lot easier.

It's the lure of possibility that is most entrenching.

Possibility to make something good happen, or prevent something bad
from happening.  The former is the "additive" kind, can be quite
obsessive and somewhat detrimental, but it is easier to identify as
silly.  I.e. can live without a good thing.  The latter one is more
anchored to the idea that living with a bad thing is horrendous.  This
is a bit harder to overcome.  Guilt plays a much bigger role there:
did I do enough?  Am I to blame for this?

Once it's clear that there is no blame to assign, the judgment often
disappears as in "nothing left to do; time to move on".



Entry: Hurricane Ranch talk
Date: Fri Sep 27 16:59:45 EDT 2013

Daniel at [3] 13:30 about "in the seeing just the seen"[4].

[1] http://www.pragmaticdharma.com/2011/01/hurricane-ranch-dialogue-part-1/
[2] http://www.pragmaticdharma.com/2011/01/hurricane-ranch-dialogue-part-2/
[3] http://www.pragmaticdharma.com/2011/01/hurricane-ranch-dialogue-part-3/
[4] http://www.dharmaoverground.org/web/guest/dharma-wiki/-/wiki/Main/MCTB+The+Non-Duality+Model?p_r_p_185834411_title=MCTB+The+Non-Duality+Model


Entry: Just drop it
Date: Sat Sep 28 19:14:27 EDT 2013

Somewhere from Daniel's [1] videos, actually here[2], he mentions to
"just drop it".  Tried that today, and it seems that at this point, it
leads me past a block that seems to be going on.

Somehow it has become obvious that tuning into impermance is where I
need to look next, and focusing on just dropping gives a glance to
that, somewhat from the other side as "note gone" (Shinzen Young).

Direct focus on emptiness doesn't seem to do it these days.  Too much
distraction, little concentration.  It's as if I can see it clearly
only for a moment, then get swept away.  Focus on dropping installs a
different kind of hook; it colours attention to look for attachment.

So maybe this is a good time to focus on emptyness and impermance at
the same time.  According to MCTB, when both qualities are perceived
simultaneously, a fruition occurs (3 doors: emptiness, impermance and
suffering) I never was able to relate this to any of my experiences of
going through a fruition, except for the "fluttering" thing in a focus
on impermance which didn't really feel like a fruition.  The frution I
know is the profound dropping of the sensation of self.  It's been
absent for a while.  About half a year.


[1] http://www.youtube.com/user/empty0grace?feature=watch
[2] http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CW59tR3GxYY



Entry: So why is life so sticky these days?
Date: Sat Sep 28 19:30:41 EDT 2013

Confronted with a lot of uncertainty and experience of fear and doubt.
Dissonance between the positive idea of life progressing in the right
direction on one side, and the inability to deal with the mental
turmoil caused by aversion to the associated practical process on the
other.

Mostly insecurity I guess.

What does insecurity really feel like?  It seems to somehow be related
to an imagined physical threat.  Even if the subject is entirely
non-physical (e.g. loss of money, having to perform certain
undesireable actions).  It is very much a high-order fear.  Maybe that
is why it is so sticky.  A fear of having to face aversion.  Sounds so
bizar putting it in words..

It has very much an in/out quality to it.  Inside the bubble, there is
suffering.  Outside it all seems a bit silly.  I'm experiencing both,
and am puzzled why the contrast is so stark.




Entry: Ingram's macho style
Date: Sat Sep 28 20:25:18 EDT 2013

Doesn't work very well for me.  It seems that sitting with the rawness
is just too much.  Better to first calm down a bit, then do vipassana.
I simply can't concentrate when there's too much dissatisfaction.
It's fluff dissatisfaction also: goes away when concentration is there.


Entry: identification
Date: Sun Oct  6 12:07:37 EDT 2013


been trying to catch the process of identification.

it's easiest to catch when i'm doing things i "like" and somehow
"frustration" pops up.  sounds contradictory, right?

well that's exactly what makes it a bit easier to recognize, that
tension of judgement.  suddenly it is clear that the particular thing
that is driving the frustration or the like isn't "of me", and a very
clear all-body release takes its place.

it's also easier to recognize when things i "don't like" go from bad
to worse.  i.e. when absurdity becomes obvious and it is easier to let
go in that ordinary meaning of not caring, really.  catching the
negative outfall of the not caring makes room for again seeing the
identification, negative identification in this sense: "that things is
*definitely not* me", i.e. the creation of strong duality, separation
of this and that.

the middle part i have a lot more trouble with:

work, and expectation, and the idea that's in the background that
"this is for money".  somehow it creates a construct that forces me to
"submit in anger", not the other meaning of submitting which is to
recognize that the difference between "this" and "that" is just a
construct to not be taken as too solid.




Entry: Strong Aversion
Date: Thu Oct 10 14:06:15 EDT 2013

Don't know what hit me.  Maybe some circumstances pushed me into an
unreasonably strong aversion towards pretty much everything.  As if
I'm wearing cold, wet clothes that I just cant get out of..



Entry: Morning
Date: Mon Oct 28 11:45:23 EDT 2013

Still there: strong aversion to do anything in the morning.  Most
seems to be related to absence of intrinsic motivation, i.e. being
somehow forced to do something I don't see bringing any short-time
benefit.

This part takes courage..  Maybe it is time to incorporate quiet
sitting in the work day?  Since the goal is to make things better and
to get clarity, it might actually make a lot of sense.



Entry: Bad dark night..
Date: Sun Dec  1 18:26:48 EST 2013

Yeah it sucks..  I'm pretty much stuck.  It's been going on for a
while now.  Stopped frequent meditation early 2013 when getting into
some (positive) obsession.  Then got a severe backlash lasting since
say April.




Entry: INTJ
Date: Mon Dec 16 18:27:54 EST 2013

Did one of those Jungian 16-bin personality tests again.
I'm an INTP[1] married to an ENFP[2].  Hamming distance of 2 :)

Been thinking a lot about introversion.  It seems to hit in periods.
At this point in time I find it terribly exhausting to interact with
people, or more generally any kind of "external unpredictability".
Very much looking for the long tail, not the quick distraction.

It is as if in those times, creativity needs to flow out instead of
in.  I need to _do_ things.  Get in the flow.  Be left alone for very
long periods of time.  Some of that is coming, soon.

[1] http://www.personalitypage.com/INTP.ht
[2] http://www.personalitypage.com/ENFP.html



Entry: Practice
Date: Mon Dec 16 18:44:46 EST 2013

Intended to keep things going after we closed the house.  Was getting
really bogged down.  Found out meditation helps, but can't seem to
keep it up.

Sitting down is too frightening or otherwise painful.



Entry: Loosing concentration
Date: Tue Dec 17 00:11:03 EST 2013

Today I did a boring job: manual data entry.  A bit of an insult to a
professional automator :)

Anyway, the mindlessness of the job did bring me to some kind of raw
awareness that doesn't arise in thinking jobs, or in jobs that allow
the mind to wander, like doing the dishes.  Somehow it had just the
right amount of mental load and focus to keep away the wander but
still cause intense boredom after a while.

It was when the concentration fell away that the boredom really
started.  The mind wanting to escape from the stranglehold.  The
struggle.  The pressure.  The dragging.  The pain.  The resentment.

The point I want to make is that particular "falling apart" is and
always has been intensely uncomfortable for me.  It is where my
megalomanic self image (illusion of mental omnipotence) breaks down
most clearly.  And it hurts.  And I try to ignore it but continue
anyway.  And then it hutrs more.

Next time, maybe it is a good idea to try to observe the sensation of
"loosing concentration".  How to concentrate on loosing concentration?

The classical advice is to become aware of wandering and bring the
mind back to the breath or other resting point without resistance.

It seems that most of the problem here is that "loosing concentration"
means something like "the mind _really_ wants to be somewhere else
now".



So, let's turn this into a practice.  Whenver confusion or distraction
arises and it or it's effects are noticed, focus on the sensation of
confusion or the tension it creates.



Entry: Heart
Date: Sat Dec 21 01:48:13 EST 2013

Blown off my socks by this[1].

Technique: normal noting: note whatever arises, but once something is
noted, focus on the heart / chest area briefly and go back to noting
what arises.

Experiences: widened field of presence, spanning the sensation of
residing in the head with residing in the whole upper torso area.
Feelings of disorientation.  Clear flashes of moment-to-moment
impermanence followed by fear.  Some very strong deep sufferying /
crying sensations, but without the usual co-arising desperation.
Weird shit!

Calm afterward.  Reading web, watching video.  Focused state is
different.  Did some perceptiual threshold change?



[1] http://www.dharmaoverground.org/web/guest/discussion/-/message_boards/message/94037?_19_redirect=%2Fweb%2Fguest%2Fdiscussion%2F-%2Fmessage_boards%2Fsearch%3F_19_redirect%3D%252Fweb%252Fguest%252Fdiscussion%26_19_breadcrumbsCategoryId%3D0%26_19_breadcrumbsMessageId%3D0%26_19_searchCategoryId%3D0%26_19_searchCategoryIds%3D0%26_19_threadId%3D0%26_19_keywords%3Dnikolai%2Bstephen%2Bhalay%26_19_delta%3D20%26_19_advancedSearch%3Dfalse%26_19_andOperator%3Dtrue%26cur%3D28


Entry: No escape
Date: Fri Dec 27 19:59:21 EST 2013

There is no escape.  I'm sick with worry at this time.  Worry is such
that it clouds your judgements.  Overrides the idea that "all is
well".

I'm having a hard time with worry and trust these days.  The
interesting thing is that the worry seems to be about other people,
but at the core it is really about future pain, the pain of conflict,
of loss, of change.

At the heart is also the distrust in self about being able to handle a
particular situation.

I'm quite confused these days.  There seems to be no ground in things.



Entry: Image
Date: Sat Dec 28 21:58:02 EST 2013

It's become quite clear that a lot of current frustration is rooted
for 90% in an obsession with what people think of me.  Of what I am
supposed to be, whatever that means..

Something is not right with my self-image.  Or rather, I'm in a phase
where I want to define myself, while at the same time thinking /
knowing that this is completely absurd.  The urge is very strong.

The tendency to define is getting in the way of living.
I need to do some weird shit.
Have an adventure.



Entry: Self-referencing
Date: Sun Dec 29 12:22:01 EST 2013

Two kinds:
A) look at me   doing this cool stuff => this is cool stuff
B) look at them doing that cool stuff => that is cool stuff 

I had a lot of A) in the last decade.  This seems to have disappeared
to a large extent.  However, the B) part - jealousy? - is still there
as an annoying pattern.

Now that I think of it, A) is still there in social situations.
Somehow the intensity of identification is fueled by other people
being present.



It's about the distinction between the sensation of a jolt of
interest, stimulation, and the social dynamics that lead to acceptance
in a certain group.



Entry: Depressed
Date: Tue Dec 31 11:46:11 EST 2013

So what does it feel like?

Hope is not accessible.
Memory an association don't work properly.
The "now" sucks.

Nothing is interesting.
It's impossible to believe that anything i ever did could be interesting.
There is just the memory of me working on things, getting ideas and being inspired.



Entry: Ambivalence
Date: Tue Dec 31 23:19:47 EST 2013

Sometimes I want to eat the world.
And other times I want to puke it out.



Entry: Alcohol
Date: Sat Jan  4 20:42:28 EST 2014

Alcohol is schizofrenic.
Strangely "matters".
Different outlook.
Oversimplified.


Alcohol being a mean drug and all, but I wouldn't want to know what my
life would have looked like without it.


Entry: Expect
Date: Sat Feb  8 15:49:45 CET 2014

things didn't work as expected, and while that is to be expected, i
didn't expect the way it differed


Entry: Take the energy of the emotion, drop the attachment
Date: Tue Feb 25 21:35:59 CET 2014

It's not possible to not experience the emotion, but with practice it
becomes possible to take it's energy and put it to use, and drop the
attachment.

[1] http://www.buddhistgeeks.com/2014/01/bg-307-everything-workable/


Entry: dark night = breaking addiction
Date: Wed Feb 26 23:19:15 CET 2014

Ken describes[1] the dark night as:

- Having seen paradise, the feeling of sliding back, having lost paradise.

- Breaking the attachment, the addiction to the waking life's drives

Coming back to my own (sporadic) practice, this is pretty much where
I'm at.  Constantly getting caught into the trap of attraction.

[1] https://www.buddhistgeeks.com/2008/10/bg-093-the-meditative-maps-happy-mornings-and-dark-nights/



Entry: Three Perspectives - Three Jewels
Date: Sat Mar  1 15:17:59 CET 2014

Perspectives and language.

- first person
contemplation
buddha nature (i am the other)

- second person
community
interaction

- third person
personal distance
objectification

She also mentioned Kel Wilber's work on this.

[1] http://www.buddhistgeeks.com/2008/03/bg-064-discover-yourself-as-a-perspective-taking-being/
[2] http://www.buddhistgeeks.com/2008/03/bg-065-the-three-faces-of-spirit-where-is-awareness-locating-itself/




Entry: Don't rationalize anger
Date: Fri Apr  4 09:36:19 EDT 2014

Anger, at least in the way I experience it, is an expression of
frustration: a clear and strong reaction to a clear and strong
sensation of being out of control, often a recurrent one.

If the cause of anger recurs, the anger recurs until the sensation of
lack of control is either mediated - e.g. by dealing with a situation
in a different way - or truly accepted as being out of control.  The
latter is often the real solution.

For me, dealing with people's reactional patterns has always been a
big challenge.  Not getting carried away in such situations by my own
reactional patterns is a symptom of presence.  It's these reactional
cycles that drive people apart.  The only thing necessary is one
person to stop the cycle, and bring kindness to the situation instead
of ego-driven bullets.

The ego is the fighter.
The strong self who shall not be messed with..



Entry: Disappoint
Date: Thu Apr 24 09:27:35 EDT 2014

It's strange that it is impossible to see happiness from within
depression, hope from within dispair, engagement from within boredom,
accomplishment from within disappointment.

Both sides _really_ don't understand each other, it's just the vague
echo in the mind and the hint of things being different that paints a
picture of what those emotional states look like, but feeling them all
at once - not a chance.




Entry: Loosing perspective
Date: Sat May  3 05:32:53 EDT 2014

Embedded, disappointed, overwhelmed, disconnected.



Entry: Stuck
Date: Mon Jun 16 12:29:51 EDT 2014

Yep seriously and inexcapably stuck.  I loose interest and motivation.
Lethargy is strong.

Cause is perceived as relational: work, home.  People are not behaving
as I would like them too.


What is scary is that the ever burning fire for finding things out is
completely gone.  My whole being feels without purpose.

I simply do not care about anything.




It's strange..  What I want is to have that caring back.



Entry: Lack of focus
Date: Mon Jun 16 23:29:14 EDT 2014

This afternoon a bubble bursted.  An emotional breakdown happened and
after seeing the inner toddler kicking and screaming finally I caught
a glimpse of sunlight through the absurdity of it all.

The rest of the day was calmer and I found some courage to do insight
meditation, seeing a lot of that anger dissolve and clueless love and
kindness pass by.

What is clear after that sit is that concentration is what is lacking.
Concentration is what brings joy.

That painfully clear lack of concentration is also the main ingredient
of suffering when I get into a mood like today / yesterday.

The pain of not being able to focus, being swept away by dispair
because there are no results, it's not moving along.  It has no
intrinsic value.

That (lacking) focus IS the (missing) intrinsic value.

It would be nice to turn dealing with this into experiment.  It's so
easy to loose oneself in story..



Entry: Concentration
Date: Thu Jun 19 00:02:57 EDT 2014

It's quite clear that the one thing that is lacking is focus, and the
one thing that can bring it back is noting practice.

Once I get into a more focused state, all the rest comes by itself...

Wow just experienced a shift while typing that.

It feels I'm on the brink of something but the stirred up mud is
limiting view.



The problem is getting to sit down on the damn cushon and do the damn
practice.  Giving in to it is very hard - letting go in general is.
Very embedded in what is right/wrong or maybe better "fair".



Entry: So what happened?
Date: Thu Jun 19 00:23:13 EDT 2014

Early 2013 while finishing up a project, I got very deep into a
"bossless" project which was very engaging.  This went OK for a couple
of months in that it was a solace, a thing to live for to cope with
some of the other shit going on.  However it burned me out eventually
and needing to pick up payed work again that double-burned me out and
brought me into serious crisis up to right about now where I snapped
two days ago.

Somewhat rock-bottom but on the uplift in that it's gotten clear that
I won't survive this unless I get to regular practice again.

The wisdom seems to be there.  It is just not very accessible in
day-to-day living - burried deep under layers of embedding..

So roughly my history:
- hitting rock bottom end of 2011 after a couple of miserable years
- discovering Ingram's work
- meditating during 2012
- getting somehere (stream entry?) around easter 2012
- falling off the wagon near end of 2012 / beginning 2013
- feeling miserable from summer of 2013 lasting upto summer of 2014

During the time off the cushon, I worked a lot - pretty much in
isolation.  Lived life as a part time bachelor.


Interpretation: going back over this log to find the point where I
presumably entered the dark night again.  Somewhere around end of 2012.

It's probably earlier, but around that time I stopped meditating so it
went out of direct awareness and got quite nasty.  At 2012/12/15 I
essentially lost my job.



Entry: Joy
Date: Sun Jun 22 02:02:24 EDT 2014

My "public" life is just a story.  Time to treat it as such.  Actually
I'm already treating it as such by creating it.  Now time to not take
it too serious.  I do take it quite serious despite plenty attempt to
convince myself otherwise.

I can see the "snap" coming up and in a state of concentration it's
easier to stay on top.  Something like instant disappointment,
judgement, pre-emptive despair (e.g. "it's not going to work"),
realization of social blunder (now their going to think x).


Had a nice sit.  Some cycling more apparent: fear, disgust, death
(misery, suffering), reobservation, quick pass through what is
probably equanimity to brief distraction then full on bliss: so full
the bowl overflows many times.



Entry: Kickback
Date: Tue Jun 24 22:19:28 EDT 2014

Feeling a kickback come up.  Strong ego, discontentment, jealousy.

Time for a serious sit.


Entry: Enthusiasm
Date: Wed Jun 25 00:18:41 EDT 2014

I think it's probably Daniel Ingram's enthusiasm that got me into the
meditation business.  So full of genuine awe it's contageous.

This passage is actually quite useful, where he explains the process
of defining a vantage point[2].

[1] https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hNg-gps9O0w
[2] https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hNg-gps9O0w#t=7717



Entry: So what brings you joy, she asks.
Date: Wed Jun 25 00:20:20 EDT 2014

And I say flow, and letting go in meditation which is probably also
flow.  So where does it go wrong.  Where is the kickback coming from?
Why is it so successful in removing that joy?



Entry: No spunk
Date: Thu Jun 26 22:16:41 EDT 2014

So fell into that mood again.  Not too worried about it, just going
with it instead of trying to resist and go into some kind of maniac
mode.  Properties are tiredness, disinterest in technical subjects,
aversion to focus.

As I recall from before, the aversion to focus is probably key to
breaking through the rut.

Jealousy was part of it too today.


Entry: Ebb and Flow
Date: Thu Jun 26 22:23:15 EDT 2014

Seems to be part of the deal.  Low energy states, not being able to
think clearly, seems to trigger a spiral.

What is hard is to bear what feels as a sickness: not able to generate
any ideas.  To be without inspiration is death.

[1] http://www.theatlantic.com/features/archive/2014/06/secrets-of-the-creative-brain/372299/


Entry: Back again
Date: Sat Jun 28 12:59:03 EDT 2014

Very conditional though.  Started out grumpy this morning, probably
still result of a conversation last night I didn't like so much.
Started with a "get it done" mentality and worked a bit on the old
problem child project.  Got somewhere, feel relieved.  New courage.

Still conditional.  Apart from just looking at this moment from time
to time, can't really do much dharma during the day.  Brain is too
active and desires are too strong...  All that is easily dismissed as
bullshit fluff.  Yeah I lead two lives...



Entry: Alcohol again
Date: Mon Jun 30 01:23:23 EDT 2014

Too bad the come-down is so rough.
I had a very nice evening beer-coding.
Takes away a lot of fear and doubt.
Makes things very simple.

Yeah it's a different world.
Dipping into it brings back other dippings, otherwise inaccessible.


EDIT: Had a lot of water so no hangover.  Just a little tired.  It was
a nice field trip - I think I needed that.  Change of perspective.
Would like life to be simple like that..

EDIT: Doing this twice already starts addiction phenomena.  Dangerous
drug.


Entry: Fear is born of duality
Date: Wed Jul  2 20:58:04 EDT 2014

Interesting.  The story and the pointing thing doesn't seem to work
for me but I guess I can relate it to dropping of self.

[1] https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PAckqzUSPiw



Entry: Coming down from strong identification
Date: Thu Jul  3 17:43:32 EDT 2014

When I work (for the man or for myself) I get strongly identified.
Worked up in shoulds.  Coming down from that - or awakening if you
want - is hard.  There doesn't seem to be a way to not get into
identification in the first place.  The thing is: it is useful for
interacting with "work world".  Just that taking this serious is an
easy trap to fall into.

So how to come down skillfully from an ego trip?

Sitting seems to help, though I never want to.  It scares me because
of the initial jolt of pain that is associated with letting go.

Cleaning the house seems to work: it gives me something to do while
I'm still quite attached, then slowly releases the grip.  And shit
gets done meanwhile..  It is as if work attachment gets replaced with
cleanliness attachment and that latter one is easier to let go or at
least easier to satisfy :)

So there is not really a manual.  Letting go is the thing.  The
trouble is that is exactly what you DON'T want to do at a time of deep
clinging.



Entry: Off
Date: Sat Jul 12 16:51:37 EDT 2014

Feeling off today, and briefly focusing on that it's clear there is a
lot of desire to things I can't have.  Realizing this is going on
creates a "micro detach" that is associated with a "micro blisswave".
What is clear is that there are a _lot_ of these microattachments in
my current state of mind, and seeing them takes time and is painful.


Entry: Out of tune
Date: Sat Aug  2 20:59:18 EDT 2014

Probably lack of sleep and alcohol hangover.  Strongly embedded,
identified, dissatisfied.

Need something to believe in...  That it's not all a waste.  That
there is a point to it all.

So i took the proverbial sit, laying down.  Looking straight at
suffering, it immediately becomes clear that it is tied to
identification, to centralization, duality.

How come this needs practice?  Why isn't it possible to just be aware
of this all the time?

Why is it so easy to fall into the trap of embedding, identification?



Entry: The pattern is forgetting there is a pattern
Date: Sun Aug  3 15:27:36 EDT 2014

I've been here before so many times.  Isolated.  Disconnected.
Depressed.  Fatigued.  Self-loathing.  Resisting.

What is there every time is the ignorance that this is rooted in
duality, in perceiving the self as separate from and in conflict with
everything that is perceived.

What is there is a strong reluctance to sit down and stare it in the
face.

That apparently hasn't sunk in yet.  Rationally the pattern is
recognizable, but from first person perspective it isn't really clear
yet.

Resistance just dropped away while writing with the experience of
observing my hands typing this.




Entry: Driven by fear
Date: Wed Aug  6 19:55:25 EDT 2014

There's this moment of joy when realizing fear has no ground.  It is
just fear.  It consumes.  Fear is fear of loosing.  Making that
explict helps tremendously in seeing its nature.

I was surprised how much my current life situation is again about
maintaining a sense of security.  I felt very conditionally happy once
two uncertain situations got resolved.



Entry: Maybe wading through ignorance is necessary
Date: Wed Aug  6 20:13:49 EDT 2014

Seeing the pop out of an embedded state after being inside it for a
long time re-installs confidence in contemplation.  Is live in the
embedded state "worth" anything?

Maybe the "joyful embedding" is.  The persuit of discovery, the
running of a well oiled machine.  It seems that there the hold is
useful: it has a function to sustain engagement.

How sad it is though when it goes awry.  When the hold doesn't loosen
at the end of the day when tiredness takes over.  When nothing of
"value" has been found and much grinding of teeth results.


Entry: engaged / flow
Date: Mon Aug 11 00:08:30 EDT 2014

So what is flow other than intense non-duality?
There is no I in flow.
This experience is what I seek a lot.



Entry: Another hit
Date: Wed Aug 13 03:39:37 EDT 2014

Tired, can't sleep.  Worried about future and place in the world.
Scared about getting old.


Entry: Need for rock bottom
Date: Sat Aug 16 01:03:22 EDT 2014

Am I depressed?  Or is this a dark night?  There is a profound feeling
of "not getting it".  In more than one sense: not understanding it,
and not receiving what ought to be mine.

And yet the answer is just to let it all go.  It is amazing how much
freedom there is in not having any ties, and how there is still flow
and purpose.  Is there a way to find balance?  To strip obsession down
to its essence: natural flow of creativity?

The artist should come out again.


Entry: It's not different - chop wood, carry water
Date: Thu Aug 21 23:19:09 CEST 2014

Time to grow up some more?  Knowledge work isn't any different from
any other work.  Frustration is sign of identification, which seems to
be a lot easer to fall into when the mind is occupied with "thinking".

Though it seems that often "thinking" is just "creating a context of
anger and dissatisfaction to motivate the effort needed for
implementing change".


- slow down, find the moment
- in despair, realize that lifting obstacles creates visibility



Entry: Forcing into social
Date: Fri Aug 22 05:36:24 CEST 2014

I've been trying to "force" myself into social situations latetely, to
dial back on the isolation.  That is not the way.  The way is to open
up first, and the only way that works is meditation, and to spend time
with people I feel safe with.

Sad about a missed opportunity for conversation recently..


Entry: Sit
Date: Fri Aug 22 05:39:43 CEST 2014

Something opened up tonight then closed down after going back to the
usual browsing the internet attention spill..

Very visceral as well.
Several shifts of concentration levels I can no longer recognize.
I can still tap into it.  The antenna is out.
Watching BATGAP and getting a little annoyed at Rick's ego tripping..


Entry: mind debugging
Date: Thu Aug 28 00:43:48 CEST 2014

45 planned sit, got to 28 mins had to write this down.

Somehow these days I have to hit despair before I can gather the courage to sit down.
Despair is clearly caused by getting stuck in patterns of goal oriented thinking.

There is nothing to have.  Only to experience.

Somehow many things I do go from realizing this, breathing it, to
dropping into ignorance and want.  Have something work.  Have
something progress, get better.  Have something finished.  Have people
behave differently..

There is only joy in bonding, unifying with flow.

In software development, debugging is perseverance:
there is always something you're not seeing clearly.  

Insight Meditation is mind debugging.
Removing unseen clinging.
If unseen it will suck you right back in.


EDIT: Should probably mention that it took until 22 minutes into the
sit before I hit a state of equanimity.  The moment before hitting
that the clinging became obvious - hard to describe how it manifested
but it's like a clenched fist in the solar plexus area.  Relaxing that
"muscle" gives rise to the transition.  Before that there was nothing
but turmoil and getting lost in thoughts.  I got up to abort after
about 10 minutes or so before realizing I should probably go sit down
again and let go of the current drama thread, which I did.  After
writing down this and the next post I sat down to finish the remaining
17 minutes and found the embedding to have returned.  Probably during
the writing of the poem, editing and then going into "good boy" mode
after a sense of pride and desire for praise set in.

Despair is gone though, but genral disattisfaction is right here
again.  Is equanimity thought of as an absorbtion state?



Entry: just words dancing
Date: Thu Aug 28 01:23:14 CEST 2014

wish i had a way to convey
how i'm dying and being reborn
there's no way back once clearly seen
how clinging leaves me bent and torn

sinking in then bouncing back when hitting bottom
by staring at the anger
and fear that keeps me wedged

cycle starts again
and again
while the thick fog clears
little by little

i would like to share
but smell distrust, disgust and see blank stares
i go into the night alone

in this solitude we are all one
that through which the universe sees itself
and weeps, hung over, from being drunk on self again

i see others, everyone?
trapped in that cage of me
jailed by need for distinction

mind as a tool to find food
and fend off bears
does not deserve the throne

it thinks it does
and spends its days
convincing that which is just words dancing



Entry: have tos
Date: Thu Sep 11 13:58:56 CEST 2014

Drowning in have-to's.  Flow is gone...  Takes out all the energy.

Too much reactive activity: playing ping-pong with the world and
resisting it.  Need a break.

I wonder if there's a way to reduce the suffering here while remaining
functional.  Best approach seems to just drop everything, truly, and
let perspective come back first.  Then pick up one by one.


Entry: inside the pull
Date: Sat Sep 13 13:15:31 CEST 2014

Reading Adyashanti's The End of Your World[1].

Reminded of the "vacillation".  Have it very strong these days.
Looking for a way to escape in code as I used to do, but can't because
of fatigue and also maybe less belief in some of my earlier drivers:
necessity to distinguish myself.  Irony is, apart from intrinsic
emptyness of approval that's become a lot more obvious, I've
maneuvered myself so far away from common sense there's nobody left to
give the approval..


  What in me can still go into division?[2]

  The search for a meaning in life is a surrogate for the realization
  we are life.  Only someone disconnected from life will look for
  purpose.

About getting stuck in meaninglessness after first realization

  One of the antidotes to being stuck in meaninglessness is to see
  that we are only looking at truth from the ego's point of view.
  From the ego's point of view, awakening has no benefit.

[1] http://www.adyashanti.org/index.php?file=productdetail&iprod_id=326
[2] http://books.google.be/books?id=BTPfoFH1LTUC&pg=PA103&lpg=PA103&dq=%22What+in+me+can+still+go+into+division?%22&source=bl&ots=neBd62c7kX&sig=IJ1ijGJZmq40JI9J0euGD9gtyx4&hl=en&sa=X&ei=I08UVJ7hJOq7ygPLlYJg&ved=0CCkQ6AEwAg



Entry: practical tricks
Date: Sun Sep 14 10:37:47 CEST 2014

I will try to edit these over time and maybe annotate how it goes.

- Do programming work as the witness.

  After about half an hour it seems that strong identification sinks
  in.  Especially after getting some exciting ideas.

  Coffee confusion doesn't help presence of mind.

- Sit down in the pain when it comes up.



Entry: Fatigue to Fear
Date: Thu Sep 18 23:36:54 CEST 2014

Thoughts create fear when they're unbalanced, as when fatigue sets in.



Entry: Productive and Happy?
Date: Sun Sep 21 17:27:42 CEST 2014

Thinking about flow a lot and how I'm not experiencing it that much.

The flow kind of absorbtion - as opposed to the the obsessive kind -
is a wholesome experience.  It feels right, it feels devoid of
attachment, it feels as a harmony with experience.  There is no doer.




Entry: Tony Parsons
Date: Wed Sep 24 22:46:41 CEST 2014

Tony Parsons, The Open Secret[1]


the arising of a sense of self is illusory
the individual thinks it's real
you won't ever know there is no you  (!)
the illusion can collapse and there's nothing left
this message can't be understood - i don't understand it (!)
me wants to search and grasp - that is futile
the me lives in a finite reality and is looking for the infinite
when the energy of me collapses, all there is is the infinite, beingness, freedom
there's nobody in that
me rejects this message
me lives in a dream called "i am real"
the self longs for it's own absence
the me would like to think that it can achieve liberation but it never can
the illusion can't make itself die
it's about the end of that which wants an answer
...
there's no me, there's simply tea or coffee
me needs a goal; me needs to hope and dream
the problem with me is that it thinks it can only get anywhere by knowing anything
...
do you have any advice? none at all!
...
what's always dissatisfying for me is the sense of being separate, which drives it on to seeking fulfillment

And so on... interesting :)
And it makes sense, from memory.




[1] https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kg8WHzKidiw
[2] http://www.nigelfarndale.com/2013/06/tony-parsons/
[3] http://www.dharmaoverground.org/discussion/-/message_boards/message/4665058


Entry: From curiosity to greed
Date: Wed Oct  1 13:48:36 CEST 2014

Again about the tipping point between "wholesome" intrigue, interest,
intrinsic motivation, curiosity and the shift to "aquiring knowledge
and power".

I.e from "just there" to "purpose, use".


Entry: Ken Wilber
Date: Sun Oct 19 13:03:43 EDT 2014

You need a cognitive framework or else it won't stick[1].
You'll get more depressed than when you went in.

[1] https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2MKf-MsGEs8#t=1290



Entry: Spaced out
Date: Tue Oct 28 17:58:15 EDT 2014

Been trying this[1].  Leaves me pretty much "spread out" - hard to
focus on work payed or otherwise..

Might be because of other things going on though.

[1] http://thehamiltonproject.blogspot.com/2012/04/yogi-toolbox-gathering-momentum-at-work.html


Entry: Three Perceptions
Date: Tue Nov  4 02:32:57 EST 2014

Makes sense.  Ways of looking instead of properties of reality?

[1] http://thehamiltonproject.blogspot.com/2012/09/the-yogi-toolbox-discerning-three.html


Entry: My favorite emotions
Date: Fri Nov 28 00:23:10 EST 2014

[1] http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anger
[2] http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Resentment
[3] http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Indignation
[4] http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fear
[5] http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anxiety



Entry: Motivation
Date: Sun Nov 30 14:16:35 EST 2014

Trying to see if here is a pattern to the general malaise that seems
to come out of the blue.  I had quite a good day yesterday, but today
I'm tired, unmotivated, uninterested.  Generally "off".

Watched some standup comedy, which was fun and did bring a little
equanimity and joy back, but the tiredness is still there.  I didn't
sleep a full 8h so that might be part of it.  Maybe a nap is in order.



Entry: violence as acting out
Date: Mon Dec  1 23:17:00 EST 2014

About the 2011 England riots:

Man is not simply a product of objective circumstances.  We all have
this margin of freedom in deciding how we subjectivise these objective
circumstances which of course determine us.  How we react to them by
constructing our own universe.  The conservative solution is we need
more police, we need courts which pass severe judgements.  I think
this solution is too simple.  If one listens closely to some of David
Cameron's statements, Ok they are beating people, burning houses, but
the truly horrible thing is that they were taking objects without
paying for them (laughs).  The ultimate sin that we can imagine.

In a very limited way Cameron was right. There was no idiological
justification.  It is the reaction of people who are totally cought in
the predominant idiology, but have no ways to realize what this
idiology demands of them, so it is kind of a wild acting out within
this idiological space of consumerism.

Even if we are dealing with an apparently non-idological brutality - I
just want to burn houses, to get objects - it is the result of a very
specific social and idiological constellation, where big idiology -
striving for justice, equality, etc - disintigrates.  The only
functioning idiology is pure consumerism and then no wonder what you
get as a form of protest.

Every violent acting out is a sign that there is something you are not
able to put into works.  Even the most brutal violence is the enacting
of a certain symbolic deadlock.


About Travis in Taxi Driver:

He was on the right path in a way.  You should have the outburst of
violence, and jou should direct it at yourself, but in a very specific
way:  at what in yourself chains you, ties you to the ruling idiology.


A rule that holds for all communities:

You don't only have explicit rules.  You always in order to become
part of a community, you need some implicit rules unwritten rules,
which are never publicly recognized, but they are absolutely crucial
as the point of the identification of the group.

It is as if in order to really be a member of a community, you have
the render your hands dirty.


Jacques Lecan: there is no big other.  No point of reference which
guarantees meaning.  We are alone.


[1] http://www.thepervertsguide.com/ideology/


Entry: cynic
Date: Tue Dec  2 22:30:46 EST 2014

Doing the dharma, but still a cynic ;)

[1] http://www.buddhistgeeks.com/2009/04/bg-118-an-unusually-hardcore-dharma-book/



Entry: work
Date: Tue Dec  2 23:31:05 EST 2014

Some things to note being away from stress for a bit.  It is not the
work, not the "having to".  There is just as much "having to" in doing
own work when it's not spontaneous.  I.e. if it's driven by "should".

If it's spontaneous, it just happens anyway, whether busy or not with
"have to" work.

The whole idea of "doing your own thing" is a bad promise.  There is
just time and space and those are there as long as there is no
forcing.

STOP FORCING



Entry: Too tired
Date: Thu Dec  4 21:39:00 EST 2014

So I'm too tired too meditate.  Too restless.  Too scared.  Too angry.
Too disappointed.  Too disgusted.  Or, sometimes, too happy.

I've falled off the wagon in a way that could use some intervention.
Only the evenings seem to be OK these days.  Daylight brings "shoulds"
and "ought haves" and "why am I so tired?".


In the last couple of sits it's become clear again that what is under
those toos is the real point.  I no longer see the background.  Days
are spent embedded.

I've taken up focus on breathing again, going back to basics, and
adding noting when focus returns.  Before I was doing choiceless
awareness but that seems to be too unstructured.  I need a shoehorn..


I want things I can't have.  I'm out of sync with everything.  I'm
swept away by emotions.




Entry: conceit
Date: Thu Dec  4 21:54:05 EST 2014

So first reply to this post is basically that "anything more than
noticing is just more conceit".

Then later "trying to fix it' breaks things even more. The more you
observe, the more you can then let it go.".

http://www.dharmaoverground.org/discussion/-/message_boards/message/4466216



Entry: greed / aversion
Date: Sat Dec 27 12:46:20 EST 2014

Very very strong.
Probably triggered by the whole holiday "opinions" thing..

The interesting bit is that again, becoming aware of it, naming it
makes it fade away.



Entry: Cynicism
Date: Tue Jan 13 19:44:04 EST 2015

Opened up today after a long long time of being very closed off to
anything.

I'd like to capture being on the cusp before it disappears again.  The
realization of having lived outside of connectivity of the soul,
inside the blinded view that wants things to be a certain way and
resents anything outside of that.

I at least have a little sense of harmony.

This is a much better place to come from, so why do I resist it?
Why does my being desire to dwell in the dungeon of self?



Entry: Disconnect
Date: Wed Jan 14 18:59:59 EST 2015

There is a fundamental incompatibility between the modes I get in when
I'm working (a dungeon of self), and compassionate, engaged human
interaction.

I basically really do not care about people stuff when I'm in that
zone.  And I especially have no tolerance for "personalities".
Strange how this deep embedding into own ego strongly rejects that of
others.  Maybe because in that mode it (others's egos) are actually
taken serious and seen as a direct threat?



Entry: cynicism has destroyed my life
Date: Wed Jan 14 23:05:10 EST 2015

I am quite lost and disconnected.  Only a short sit can point that out
quite clearly.  Contracted.

It is starting to feel very schizophrenic.  There are two modes.  One
is compassion and love, the other is cynicism and dungeon of self.
Open vs. closed.

Meditation is not optional for me.  Trouble is that the other one
doesn't agree.  It thinks this compassion shit is just weakness.  That
what is needed is a firm hand, and that they should all stay off my
damn property.

It is clear that momentum is key.  I don't like the other guy.  He is
poison to this body.

So what is causing this?  Not meditating is one thing.  The problems
arise mostly because I can no longer find satisfaction in showing off.
It is as if my reward has been taken away, but the suffering remained.

It's the cynical outlook that sincerely distrusts emotions,
intentions, basically whole of human nature that is causing the drive
to isolation and the disinterest in other people.  It is getting
worse.



Entry: a manual
Date: Wed Jan 21 20:22:15 EST 2015

A tendency I experience is to write "manuals for good living" and then
never read what I wrote.  Insights are fleeting.  The trouble seems to
be the cultivation of presence of mind in all situations.  Those that
need "help" are those where abilities are impaired..



Entry: conflicted
Date: Sun Feb  1 18:46:36 EST 2015

Listened to [1] yesterday.  Apart from getting a bit annoyed by the
guy's personality - sorry for that and for feeling the need to express
it - there was an interesting point made in that "today's
enlightenment is tomorrow's mistake".  In that it's not a relalization
if you're not living the consequences.

It seems to describe very well where I am at: Seen part of the picture
(as to how self, the tendency to contract and close down creates all
this suffereing) but am not taking it serious.  Still spend my days
self-absorbed and shielding from the rest of the world, because
people...


Entry: holding on
Date: Sun Feb  1 19:07:49 EST 2015

So it's clear.. haven't done formal meditation for a couple of days
and got really really stuck in resentment and jealousy.  Time to sit
down and open it all up again..

I simply resent the nature of reality.

So tried to sit but couldn't.  Cleaned the room - still resentful.

Stuck.
Expecting things to be different..



Entry: Anger
Date: Wed Feb 11 21:50:49 EST 2015

I just got really angry.  I've had my little >30 minute trip of
thinking swear words and truth-tellings so time to learn something.
Probably already subsiding that a little reason is seeping in to write
this down.

Angry?  Look for the expectation (entitlement) that has been violated.

I have a strong desire to throw punches, to inflict pain.  To assert
myself, ensure compliance.  Only a little reason is preventing me.

The core seems to be defiance.

That means the thing I'm seeking is dominance.

Not very nice hey :)


But wow this shit is powerful.


Entry: Replace "because I have to" with "because I can".
Date: Wed Feb 11 23:01:57 EST 2015

Nothing is so important to get all worked up about it.  And in letting
go like that, that what requires attention will present itself in a
natural way.

If the attention doesn't come naturally in clarity, it doesn't need
it.  But the important part there is "in clarity".

"have to" means there is not clarity.  Extrinsic motivation.  In the
"have to" there is probably a trade, there is an "i want".  probably a
good idea to find that and think again.  If it's real, the have to
will disappear and turn into "of course".



Entry: no more news
Date: Thu Feb 12 15:00:16 EST 2015

Let's see if it's possible to switch off news and social media for a
while.  It's making me unhappy.


Entry: science
Date: Tue Feb 17 21:17:59 EST 2015

I still adhere to naturalism :)

However, I've been exploring some of the more out-there parts of
meditation and find that there is a lot of value in (temporarily)
letting go of the attachment to explanation.

Somehow it seems necessary, at least for me, to allow "belief" into
the picture to open up and experience fully.

It is clear that taking a naturalistic, scientific, reductionistic
stance is counter-productive to taking part in something that really
seems to be appropriately described by supernatural thinking.

I'm interested in uniting both perspectives, but for now it seems best
to turn the naturalist "off" from time to time.



Entry: Stuck
Date: Thu Feb 19 22:02:36 EST 2015

Not clear from the inside.  It's very clever in promising resolution...

The prevailing thought is:
"Just this little small thing and then I can relax."

Read as:
"I really can't let go!"



Entry: Control your wonder
Date: Fri Feb 20 18:52:44 EST 2015

[1] https://www.erowid.org/chemicals/dmt/dmt_writings3.shtml


Entry: Illusion is Necessary  (Closet Spiritual)
Date: Fri Feb 20 22:04:30 EST 2015
Tags: meta

I'm conflicted.  I don't really know what to do with all these ideas
that do not mesh well with my strong rational inclination.

There is the strong thought that "I don't really believe all that
spiritual mumbo-jumbo" but on the other side I also don't find the
false certainty brought by clinging to rationality very productive.

I'm no longer convinced that human beings are supposed to be rational
or at least spend a lot of their time in a rational frame of mind.
Rationality is an aquired taste.  A very convincing view of the world
that claims to be all-encompassing.  Rationality however is just a
tool.  A means to aid the systematic fulfillment of desires.  And can
definitely become a righteous religion.

I do not want to give up rationality.  Because I can't.  It is how I
look at the world.  It is part of my being.  It *is* the worldly
plane.  It is the standard by which I prune bad ideas.  However, it is
time to acknowledge that I am not, at my core, a rational being.

I have an inclination to step out of rationality into taking story
serious for its effect.  Words in a story as not necessarily
representing an enumeration of facts and consequences, but blobs
making up a painting that has "something".  Even if that something can
only be captured in the rational framework by the word "illusion",
there is value in that.

Illusion is Necessary.

I can't be serious and at the same time I can't ignore this simple
reality of the human condition.  I find myself creating little sand
boxes to allow the serious exploration of wondrous illusion, letting
go of the killjoy of reality.  Part of life is a trip, literally.



Entry: Fear
Date: Sat Feb 21 22:28:14 EST 2015

Facing fears.  There's been a lot of that lately...

For the record, this was very interesting: David Choe:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XeLkxL9YfKM



Entry: surrender
Date: Sun Feb 22 01:49:40 EST 2015

It's a game.
Pick your outlook or surrender when stuck.
All makes a strange kind of sense..

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BGDcSjtV8FA


Entry: DMT
Date: Sun Feb 22 02:04:14 EST 2015

Been reading and watching vids about Ayahuasca and DMT and the
ultimate idiosyncratic experience.  And doubting my sanity as this all
makes a strange kind of sense :)


Entry: DMT elves
Date: Sun Mar  1 03:01:06 EST 2015

They laugh when you think about you as you.  They think you're so funny!
27:45 [1]

[1] https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k_vMfyZc01s&t=1650


Entry: Dr. Drew
Date: Thu Mar  5 02:50:40 EST 2015

Interesting episode.  Consciousness as a connection thing, something
that happens between people?

[1] https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HpT4lKIBPWU


Entry: Wipe your feet
Date: Sun Mar  8 03:08:58 EDT 2015

Watching DMT stories online.  Some things ring true.  About a guy
having the experience of all bad things about him eating him up and
freaking out about it.  He got the message later "I was clensing you.
You can't bring that stuff here."  Also mentioned don't eat taco bell
before going, they find that very disrespectful.

In concentration practice a similar thing happens.  Transition is only
possible if you "wipe your feet".  Familiar to me is that you can't
enter some states while in a contracted state, e.g. clinging to the
desire to enter.  Calm down, spread out, let it go.  Intention is ok,
but desire is not.



Entry: Resentment is rising
Date: Tue Mar 10 13:34:24 EDT 2015

Got disturbing new yesterday.  Took it in love, strangely.  Have been
doing a lot of meditation on love which was a weird coincidence.  It
definitely put me in a position to brace for impact.

Now, a day later, resentment is rising.  Literally the sun was shining
yesterday, and today it's gray and the fog is keeping the traffic
fumes to the ground.

Such a metafor life is these days..



Entry: alcohol is a sink hole
Date: Thu Mar 12 00:50:07 EDT 2015

There is a clear conflict between open, meaningful perception of the
world and consumption of alcohol, which is a clear contraction of
that into small, self-absorbed, simplified existence.



Entry: anxiety is a disconnectedness
Date: Fri Mar 13 23:37:29 EDT 2015

around 53:00


http://duncantrussell.com/dr-drew-2



Entry: free will as a choice?
Date: Sat Mar 14 02:32:58 EDT 2015

Interesting idea: We need to act as if we have free will.

[1] http://duncantrussell.com/raghu-markus-and-saraswati-markus/



Entry: Anxiety
Date: Sun Mar 22 00:04:41 EDT 2015

Not really meditation, but I'm facing my fears these days.  Did two
today, and while it sucked and while I got very anxious, I did recover
and I feel something grew stronger.

It left me drained though.  Getting angry and scared is very tiring.

The trick seems to be to not let things sit so long.  Deal with it
when it arises.



Entry: Kornfield Mindpod
Date: Wed Mar 25 21:07:15 EDT 2015

To have wealth in this world requires a healthy dose of denial.

[1] http://www.mindpodnetwork.com/jack-kornfield-heart-wisdom-hour-episode-02-duncan-trussell-pete-holmes/



Entry: Everything is well
Date: Thu Mar 26 02:28:51 EDT 2015

In times of great turmoil it is profound to say and then realize,
"everything is well".  There is only the now, the thing right here.


Entry: Social Identity
Date: Sat Mar 28 21:00:11 EDT 2015

Relayed a disturbing life event to family and friends today.
Something I had kept to myself for a bit, then started talking about
in email, then finally talked about on the phone.

I found it interesting that in the transition between these 3 phases:
only me, email and phone, something happened to the story and
something happend to me in my self-perception which was different in
each of these cases.

I don't relate to many people and I consider most people I relate to
close friends.  I.e. I do not have a very strong external identity.
But what I do see in these relationships, especially those that are
long term, is that I _become_ the person that has the relationship
with this other person.  Assuming this is a symmetric thing, then each
relationship is actually the interaction of two created persona.

Especially talking on the phone which is more like talking in person I
felt a strong shift, a stepping into another body maybe.  For email it
feels more like stepping into another mind.

I am not sure if my experience in this sense is very common, but I
have heard it expressed before by at least one strongly introverted
person: the idea of becoming someone else - as if it's not really me
that is interacting.  Maybe this is not an extrover thing?



Entry: Alcohol is not a good drug
Date: Wed Apr  1 23:34:54 EDT 2015

I've been staying a way from it and having a training session tonight
to not get too shocked by a party tomorrow.  But it feels wrong.
Superficial, dumb, stupefied.




Entry: The big joke
Date: Fri Apr  3 14:43:37 EDT 2015

"Do you remember when you were a kid and you thought that there were
real grownups?"

I appreciate Rogan.  He can be a little crass but he hits the nail on
the head.

[1] Netflix: Joe Rogan Live 2006


Entry: Honest hangover
Date: Fri Apr  3 16:21:45 EDT 2015

There is beautiful humbling honesty in having reality come back after
a party night.  The feeling of having that carefully crafted persona
all taken apart and humiliated, exposing the raw animal underneath.

Accepting the vulnerability that comes with this process is
challenging, and I think it is wat has made me depressed a lot in the
past.  The feeling of having a dream crushed.

The problem with alcohol is that it feels so real.  It presents a
simple, dumbed down world where everything is possible and safe.

Life is fragile and there is no security in anything.



Entry: Aubrey Marcus
Date: Sun Apr  5 00:50:35 EDT 2015

We don't have an environmental problem, we have a consciousness
problem.

https://www.youtube.com/results?search_query=joe+rogan+aubrey+marcus+



Entry: Boundless love
Date: Mon Apr  6 22:03:26 EDT 2015

Powerful stuff.  Starting to see more clearly the difference between
on one side deep, impersonal love (boundless love) and on the other
side greedy love, desire, separation anxiety, fear of loneliness.

Boundless love is quite powerful, and obviously boundless.


Entry: Refine the Irrational
Date: Tue Apr  7 00:24:23 EDT 2015

[1] http://duncantrussell.com/rick-doblin-from-maps


Entry: Minute Particulars
Date: Wed Apr  8 22:01:47 EDT 2015

He who would do good to another must do it in Minute Particulars:
General Good is the plea of the scoundrel, hypocrite, and flatterer,
For Art and Science cannot exist but in minutely organized
Particulars.

William Blake

[1] http://www.mindpodnetwork.com/jack-kornfield-heart-wisdom-episode-08-transforming-darkness/



Entry: What I want?
Date: Fri Apr 10 02:50:43 EDT 2015

Is flow.  I spend a large part of my life in this state, and I love
it.  It is very painful when the state breaks down due to fatigue,
with self-awareness returning.

Flow as effortless attention.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flow_%28psychology%29



Entry: Kindness
Date: Sun Apr 12 13:28:57 EDT 2015

I wonder if life is really about re-awakening the kindness that I lost
after adolescence.  Is life about transcending the selfish animal?

( On the other hand, patting myself on the back again, spiritual
materialism is right around the corner. )


Entry: Time to stop resisting
Date: Sun Apr 12 13:42:50 EDT 2015

What am I trying to accomplish?
There is nothing to gain.

Judge it by its fruits: letting it go creates joy and happiness.
Holding onto it, focusing on what is fair only creates more suffering.



Entry: Letting go is a process
Date: Sun Apr 12 13:52:10 EDT 2015

Yeah you can't "decide" to let it go.  At least I can't.  It's a
process.  The sentiments will come back.



Entry: Not necessary
Date: Sun Apr 12 14:52:08 EDT 2015

The realization that it is not required to step into the mental
turmoil, ever, is worth all the gold in the world..



Entry: Missing time
Date: Tue Apr 14 01:05:26 EDT 2015

During sit that felt "vipassana-y" since a long stretch of blissful
absorbtion / loving kindness sits and reclines over the last couple of
weeks:

Consciousness went out - About a minute or so?
Before, gently fading out.
After, feeling of waking up, being other people.

Not sure if that thought of being other people came before or after.

I had the chance of meeting S. today, and had a sit together.  Which
was very energetic.  Went into a hard-to-describe blissful state
almost immediately (it has been coming up a lot lately), then started
recognizing access concentration, first Jhana (bodily bliss, forced
concentration) and second Jhana (bodily bliss, automatic
concentration).  With little pinpricks into third (more mental bliss)
but not stable.  After about 20-30 minutes I ended up in Fear.

EDIT: I wonder if that was a Fruition or just a doze off without
falling over..  There was a lot of bliss afterward, but dreams went
straight into fear and anger - quite violently.



Entry: Spaced out
Date: Wed Apr 15 21:34:37 EDT 2015

So the advice is to avoid getting in a trance-like state.

  The first was the state that comes when the breath gets so
  comfortable that your focus drifts from the breath to the sense of
  comfort itself, your mindfulness begins to blur, and your sense of
  the body and your surroundings gets lost in a pleasant haze. When
  you emerge, you find it hard to identify where exactly you were
  focused. Ajaan Fuang called this moha-samadhi, or
  delusion-concentration.


So I tried both.  What's easier now is to just get in a spaced out
peace and love state.  That has helped a lot over the last couple of
weeks to lift spirits.  However it is not insight nor concentration.
Concentration is clear and one pointed, not foggy and spaced out.
Insight is clear and open, receiving, not shielded off.

Maybe these days it's better to calm down through the trance-like
state (moha-samadhi in [2]) and then regain direction and focus into
concentration or insight.

EDIT: From observation, it seems that it is quite easy to get out of
this state by moving focus to bare attention.  It is indeed a form of
laziness, of not getting what I want.  It is a similar feeling of
getting bored when doing chores, a feeling of I don't want to be here,
however feeling bored feels bad while this has the nice blissful
attribute.


[1] http://www.dharmaoverground.org/discussion/-/message_boards/message/5606194/en
[2] http://www.accesstoinsight.org/lib/authors/thanissaro/jhananumbers.html


Entry: alcohol
Date: Fri Apr 17 21:46:04 EDT 2015

Having some wine after a pretty fucking weird WTF day.  Felt good
before opening the bottle, though was a little afraid of loosing it
again..

It's really not the drug that's bad.  Set and setting make up most of
it.  Alcohol can be very energetic if you use it in a low dose: just
enough to maintain that initial cool buzz and have another sip when
you feel it coming down a bit.  When done, eat something and have a
shitload of water.

Hangovers are tough though (from memory - far away now!).

And don't write any emails..

So it starts going downhill after a while.  Hard to maintain without
going faster.. 1/3 left in the bottle.

EDIT: Come down is always a little strange.  Especially the idea of
"consequence" gaining reality again..  Definitely eat some food
though.


Entry: There is nothing to have
Date: Fri Apr 17 22:10:15 EDT 2015

Pretty fucking true.
Just give it all away.  Feels better.




Entry: Jealousy
Date: Sat Apr 18 09:34:40 EDT 2015

Next hurdle?



Entry: Right action
Date: Tue Apr 28 11:50:31 EDT 2015

Funny thing is that when you do the right thing, you don't need
compliments and pats on the back.  It is as if those actually create a
separate halo of gratification around the memory of the action which
was really just a cause clarity doing its work.

Nothing big.  Nothing is big or deserves to be.

But that mind is hungry for that honey..




Entry: Derealization
Date: Fri May  8 20:52:51 CEST 2015

5 minutes or so of small "stabs" of derialization coming home by car
from the airport.
 
Strange experience.  A little scary.  As if there is an other side to
the "illusion" of conscious life.  It's just the echo though.

Maybe because I spend so much time in artifical worlds..  my normal is
definitely not that thing called the real world, that consensus reality..



Entry: Stuck
Date: Wed Jul 15 03:48:54 EDT 2015

Working a lot, in attachment.  Doing other things in attachment.  Not
feeling much clarity, afraid to meditate and let go.

Funny how my work, involving a lot of thought, prevents thinking and
self-reflective rummaging.  However it is just a substitute, not an
antidote.  The end result is not spending any time in non-embedded
states and this takes its toll.

In general, life is going well, and that is usually bad news for
progress in inisight: I am comfortable in my attachments..

Still, in the going well, there is always the discontentment and the
desire to want to be/have something else..

Maybe time for some podcasts or other community things.



Entry: Still stuck..
Date: Fri Jul 17 01:18:05 EDT 2015

Can't bring myself to sit.  Can't just.  Find "just".  "just sit".

                             * * *

That helped.  The "just".

Just 10-15 minutes but enough to pierce through a first layer, and end
up with relaxation, and a realiziation that this is necessary and that
there is some pipes to de-clog.

Also love came back.  Was gone for a bit..


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jnana



Entry: So how to fix it?
Date: Sat Jul 18 23:19:08 EDT 2015

1. When awake an positive, work.
2. When tired, sleep.

And meditate.



Entry: depressed
Date: Mon Jul 27 22:24:27 EDT 2015

The world is very small.
Nothing is interesing.
Everything takes too much effort.
Tired.
Can't sleep.
Want to work, but can't think.
Feel worthless.
Feel lonely.
Don't want people around either..
Can't make conversation.
Would like to eat to feel better.
Would like to drink or smoke.

Can't see how these "tricks to get out" work.
Can't meditate.
Just want to numb out..



Entry: Self care and the need for leisure
Date: Thu Aug 13 11:41:11 EDT 2015

http://www.metafilter.com/152045/Self-care-and-the-need-for-leisure



Entry: On being tired
Date: Fri Aug 14 12:47:24 EDT 2015

So when tired, sleep, right?
Can't sleep because I'm fretting on something I just can't let go of.

Some things are so "important" to the self, apparently, that they are
hard to cut through.  Being tired doesn't help to relax either..


Maybe today I should sit.  It's all been a bit too much recently..

I thought I was past this shit but oh no..

There's the realization that the desire to not be angry in itself is
keeping the anger alive, by keeping the attention away from the things
that actually lead to the anger.  Some of those are seemingly kept out
of awareness for good reason: seeing them clearly evaporates the whole
situation.

[stuff]

Some psychologizing is in order as I got stuck in a loop.  A lot of
these emotions do not make sense and they are exploding.  A strange
sensation, something akin to panic?

Seeing things clearly helps very well to dissipate "constructs" like
that.

So why in some cases, are these things just not accessible?  There is
a tangled mess of false reasons covering up the real thing that is at
stake: somehow, in this particular situation, I am putting up a
"front" out of fear of conflict.  But my behavior, while
understandable, isn't appropriate, triggering frustration in other
people.  I am very attached to the praise/blame game so this is making
me crazy.

Trying to manage this relation isn't working as I planned and now it
seems I am actually very attached to the persona I've been trying to
create, instead of just treating people as people.  So basically, I
deal also with being the bad guy (true in this case, of only out of
sheer incompetence of dealing with conflict).

It's like a garden that's gone wild.  Cut everything at the root?




Entry: Depression as an arsing and passing phenomenon
Date: Sun Aug 16 19:56:08 EDT 2015

Stuck deeply in woe me.
Very depressed - thinking of death, dying, reasons to stick around..

But there's a bounce in those thoughts.  As if you really have to
reach rock bottom -- along which ever axis -- to fully appreciate what
is underneath.

So much of this depression things really is about desire for something
that isn't there, and a strong focus on the experience of "me".
Actually, the "poor me".

Every time I see this lift it is so clear in that moment how strongly
the depression is tied to the sense of self.  Release that and there
is only joy, really.

I'm going to do some repairs, maybe make a fire..


Entry: Stuck again
Date: Mon Aug 17 16:41:34 EDT 2015

I keep getting stuck, and ik keep forgetting what the trick was last
time to get unstuck.  Sitting doesn't work without first letting go of
something else.  Or at least being aware of it.

Feeling: nothing appeals to me.  I feel totally lost.


Entry: Submission
Date: Sun Sep  6 11:13:51 CEST 2015

Letting Go: individual release
Surrender:  state without will
Submission: wilfull yield to reality

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=g33Dlfx4zQ0


Entry: The Path to Inner Peace
Date: Sun Sep  6 17:45:18 CEST 2015

https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCIETa-rFDLIiMQ9I4avmWOw


Entry: Getting unstuck
Date: Mon Sep 14 00:57:14 CEST 2015

Maybe it's finally time to heed some advice.  From many sources I've
learned that westerners need to combine vipassana with metta practice.
Start from a place of love.

At this point, I am stuck in dissatisfaction.  Quite strongly.
Physical presence in my solar plexus is quite strong.  Concetrating on
the region does bring some relief but it collapses quite easily again
into restlessness, and what is pretty much self-hatred.

"Self-hatred?  What is that?" [1].

The cure is clear: allow love to blossom.

[1] http://www.sharonsalzberg.com/sit/



Entry: Wonder to want
Date: Tue Sep 15 00:03:44 CEST 2015

For a long time I have been trying to find a way to describe the
transition I experience, getting contracted just being by myself
working on something that initially came out of wonder.

Starting out open, in wonder, grounded, happy to be alive and
experiencing the great mix, into wanting a certain thing to happen.
Wanting control.  Wanting respect.  Wanting predictability, security.

In this light, even work stress, something that is so easily blamed on
the want of others, is really just want.  A thing that gets created by
"me".


From the practical side, there are two problems:

- How to notice the transition.  To see obsession rise, then nip it in
  the bud.

- How to recover from excessive obsession when the ship has already
  sailed.  When the loss of ground is noticed too late.




Entry: Sinking to the bottom
Date: Thu Sep 17 13:44:44 EDT 2015

Really not getting what you want is a great way to sink to the bottom
of experience..

I feel the rug pulled out from under me recently.
While it sucks, it is also liberating in a weird way.
Instantly reconnects with the base level of love, connection.



Entry: It's all a ride
Date: Sun Sep 20 22:24:41 EDT 2015

Fun intermezzo.

It's a simulation: you're witnessing not the real universe, but a
simulation of the chemical correlate.

Enjoying misery?  That's alcoholic stuff.  Not everyone likes endorfines.

http://duncantrussell.com/dr-drew-and-fred-stoller/#/vanilla/discussion/embed/?vanilla_discussion_id=0



Entry: Depression
Date: Sat Sep 26 22:26:21 EDT 2015

So I wonder, is there a way to avert a wave of despair, or is this
pure chemicals at play that just have to be sat throug?

A key element is forgetting what it feels like to be open, harmonious.
Forgetting what seems like the solution to getting out.  Giving in to
sticking in the mud.

There is some pleasure in giving up, somehow...


So what to do?
It's time to make a list (again - I keep loosing them...)

1. do pushups

That's it.


Entry: Alcohol
Date: Sun Sep 27 01:50:40 EDT 2015

It's only the first couple, with certain optimal rate, that creates
the euphoric, resetting experience.

After that (from memory), it's downhill.  And a week or two of
abstinence is probably good.

What it provides though, is a break.  A reminder that the other thing
-- the stress, the rat race -- is just a story as well.



Entry: You're coughing in my face
Date: Sun Sep 27 02:58:23 EDT 2015

Joe Rogan about being around negative atmosphere.  ([1] near the end).
Later on: Some people are toxic, not even that they are trying to harm
you, but that they are so self-indulgent.  They constantly want to
talk about their own problems.

Ryan: That's why she likes pyschotics.  Neurotics are just a pain in
the ass, but pyschotics they can't help it.

My take: It's a slippery slope.  As long as you can stay upright and
see the other's stuff as stuff, it doesn't affect you.  It is
definitely possible to be strong and compassionate, but you need to
have your own shit together.  Once you judge the other's approach to
things -- which can happen by itself, e.g. through fatigue -- you're
in on the game..

[1] https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D3RRIv4tR_c


Entry: Consensus Reality
Date: Mon Sep 28 22:19:37 EDT 2015

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Consensus_reality


Entry: death is a good idea
Date: Thu Oct  1 22:48:24 EDT 2015

I was thinking that from a software design p.o.v., the concept of
death (avoiding long-lived state) is a very good idea to avoid errors
to propagate in time.

Precisely that also seems to be why life gets rebooted from time to
time.


Entry: Stepping out of the task list
Date: Sun Oct  4 18:26:48 EDT 2015

Creative energy is where I find my joy in life, but it is sucked away
by forced concentration.  Too much willpower spent..

How to make this work?

What I can see in meditation is that there is a way to remove the
absolute nature, to realize again this is about taking on other
people's monkeys.



Entry: Kids
Date: Wed Oct  7 02:25:05 EDT 2015

Kid: Can you tell me what God looks like, because I'm starting to forget.

[1] http://duncantrussell.com/the-many-lives-of-tait-fletcher


Entry: Surrender
Date: Wed Oct  7 02:29:09 EDT 2015

Starting to see some patterns where religion in its form of surrender
starts making a lot of sense.

Surrender is very deep.  Surrender to the idea that death is real.


Entry: Lost
Date: Wed Oct  7 03:38:11 EDT 2015

Not a smooth ride these days, all neurosis.
Love work when I get into it, but it seems to need the coffee.
Hate it when I stop and feel depleted.
Emotionally, not nourished.  Mostly because I'm not letting.
Try medidation but can't.
No willpower left [1].
Can't let go.
Constant clench in stomach.

[1] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ego_depletion


Entry: There's something I can't get out of...
Date: Thu Oct  8 01:22:57 EDT 2015

When sitting is impossible, there is something I'm not seeing.  When
quiet is scary, or uncomfortable, there is something I don't want to
see.

I'm not happy.  Not because I'm unfortunate or that I don't have
everything going for me.  Really.  It's actually quite sweet.  It's
that I'm resenting something very strongly, and that thing is
something that isn't even real.

It's quite silly, really.  There is only one thing that can be done
about such a big ball of neurotic spaghetti.  To drop it completely.
No point in untangling.  The tangle is all it is.  If it would be
untangled, there would be nothing left.

So throw out the whole thing and work with the empty space that
remains,



Entry: Stuck
Date: Fri Oct  9 04:24:54 EDT 2015

This doesn't stop, does it?
I keep waking up an hour after I go to bed.
One particular thing I don't understand how it went wrong.
Just grew out of a time of strong social phobia, then escalated.
Keep beating myself up about it as well.
It's just such a mess, all coming from going against my better judgement.
Shit.

Time to step out of it again, actively.  Do a love meditation..
Maybe it's all the procrastination that's causing this.
Time to deal with shit...


Entry: Is love an emotion?
Date: Sat Oct 10 23:20:21 EDT 2015

With most emotions having a strong self component, maybe unconditional
(unconditioned?) love should not be seen as an emption, but as a base
state that is only clouded by emotions?


Entry: Depression
Date: Sun Oct 11 02:48:39 EDT 2015

When your mind has already given up, just use what is left to take
action.  Go and _do_ something, even if you really don't want to.

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IpgX1_ZZvHs


I'm stuck.  Afraid to really sit.


Entry: The goal is irrelevant
Date: Sun Oct 11 13:03:28 EDT 2015

I've been flip-flopping between being a joyful, hopeful hacker, and a
depressed shut-in.  The thing that is absent in the latter state is
the joy of the moment, the process.  Taking something from incremental
movement.  In the depressed state, it is all about having and not
having.  It is really self-absorbed and hard to get out of.  It is
self-sustaining in both meanings.



Entry: sacrifice fear on the altar of action
Date: Mon Oct 12 00:29:53 EDT 2015

Take action.

There is truth in combat.

On whining: we're whining to the universe: can't you see I'm having a
hard time?  I deserve a toy now.  You can't help but laugh at
yourself.

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IpgX1_ZZvHs


Entry: Feeling better
Date: Mon Oct 12 17:05:59 EDT 2015

Two things happened:
- display of affection, lifting of conflict
- couple of days off of work

If external stress lifts it is obvious that things are bound to get
better.  But how to not let it in in the first place?  It might be a
lost cause...

The actual problem is letting it get over the threshold of personal
investment.  Many of these external thresholds are about acceptance
(resentment, judgement, guilt) and fear (of abandonment, loss,
aggression).

Being on the good side of the depressive divide, it is all quite
simple: don't panic, it's all not such a big deal.

How to make it across the divide while being in the state of despair?
It is so all-encompassing.

It seems that the only thing that can be done really is to stay on the
good side.  Keep awareness up.

The biggest challenge at this point seems to be waking up in the
morning.  I can make it to the other side if I don't engange in
anything, but I do not wake up well recently.


Entry: DT 71
Date: Sun Oct 18 01:49:55 EDT 2015

The hardest desire to be free of is the desire to be free of desire.
http://thedrunkentaoist.com/episodes/episode-71-discussing-wild-life-ikkyu-sojun-robert


Entry: God is in the Neurons
Date: Thu Oct 22 23:21:04 EDT 2015

Would be interesting to find some references.  Seems to be Chiren "Athene" Boumaaza.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bachir_Boumaaza:

In 2011, Boumaaza released a full-length documentary called "Athene's
Theory of Everything"[16] on the subject of conscious experience and
perception. Although the work was not peer reviewed and neither
scientifically nor philosophically rigorous, Boumaaza and his crew
claimed that the work could have implications for science and
metaphysics, and that many of its conclusions were supported by
evidence in the field of neuroscience. A follow-up called "Athene's
Scientific Cataclysm" [17] show it to be a joke.

More links:

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oPEdDcs_8ZQ&feature=youtu.be&t=18
http://www.lifetwink.com/athenes-theory-of-everything/
https://www.reddit.com/r/Psychonaut/comments/1xutxe/god_is_in_the_neurons_documentary/
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bachir_Boumaaza
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dbh5l0b2-0o
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NRH8McTn2r8

Ok, I was listening up to C=hf...
Load of bull indeed.





Entry: ego-less?
Date: Thu Oct 22 23:50:15 EDT 2015

Ran into this searching for previous post's topics.

http://thedaobums.com/topic/18041-ego-less/


Entry: How do you explain consciousness?
Date: Fri Oct 23 00:11:35 EDT 2015

Maybe time to try to track down some more established thinkers and
take a new look at some scientific contemporary ideas.  How to find
those in an era of hard-to-trust information?


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/David_Chalmers
Reductionism doesn't work for explaining subjective experience.
Consciousness is an anomaly.  Crazy ideas are needed.
Two crazy ideas:
- Consciousness is fundamental
- Consciousness is universal (panpsychism)

Link consciousness to information.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Integrated_information_theory


Entry: The hard problem of consciousness
Date: Fri Oct 23 00:40:22 EDT 2015

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JoZsAsgOSes


Entry: No carthesian theatre / No second transduction
Date: Fri Oct 23 14:05:23 EDT 2015

At about 1h:

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JoZsAsgOSes

Bayesian predictive coding - "whatever next" paper.

1:23 http://www.cogsci.uci.edu/~ddhoff/
a little far out..



Entry: Motivation gone again..
Date: Sat Oct 24 15:49:19 EDT 2015

So I've just been doing chores.
Inspiration isn't coming.
Maybe it won't for a time until all the stuff is cleared.

Meditation works again, meaning I do regain some center and remove some distraction when I actually sit.
Other that that, the main sentiment is still: I don't want to.

Ego self-defence.
There is the knowledge that this is all there is to it: to just give in.  Just let it go.
And the I knows that - it wants to remain active, creating trouble.




Entry: alcohol, the good parts
Date: Sat Oct 24 21:41:25 EDT 2015

Alcohol simplifies.

It brings up ambitious thoughts that would be quenched when wearing
the hard core, cynical, dissapointed engineer hat.

Somehow the simplification -- not knowing the trouble you're getting
yourself into -- is essential for doing things.

Alcohol can help get you in trouble, then by having to get out of
trouble when sobering up, it might actually have caused some motion.



Too bad it only lasts so short, and it's only the first, or first
couple of beers..  After that, stupid really sets in in a noticable
way.  Not just the liberating lifting of limitatition and worry about
practicalities..


Baggage.  ETOH eliminates convoluted baggage..

EDIT: for a bit.
The thing is really, it is a delusion.
And for about an hour that delusion actually has a good effect.
I.e. it is very convincing, view-changing.
After that, there is only stupid.



Entry: my left foot
Date: Tue Oct 27 23:10:49 EDT 2015

I was always intrigued by that movie, but I don't think I actually saw
it.

Anyways, my left foot tingles when I move into concentration, or when
I let go of "stomach cling".  Feeling is inside the foot, more towards
the top side, near the base of the toes.


Entry: ingram
Date: Tue Oct 27 23:26:29 EDT 2015

Watching Ingram's Cheetah House videos again.
Time to get serious again..  Need to start at 0.

 1 mind and body
 2 cause and effect
 3 three characteristics
 4 arising and passing away (fireworks)
 5 dissolusion (couch potato stage)
 6 fear
 7 misery
 8 disgust
 9 desire for deliverance
10 re-observation (all is wrong, kick in the ass)
11 equanimity (all is ok, don't stop!)
.. stream entry

In dark night, the main characteristic is the desire to find objects
"in front" but they are all around, comprising the observer.



Entry: Morality
Date: Mon Nov  2 08:04:39 EST 2015

Apart from the training in Concentration and Wisdom, maybe it is time
to revisit training in Morality.  More specifically, to re-integrate
into the world.

Apart from payed work, I live on the fringes, and I have lost
connection with something that used to give me a lot of fulfilment: to
feel part of a community of open source developers.

In the last decade I went on a solitary pilgrimage, essentially to
learn, but ultimately to get rid of arrogance of being able to do it
all by myself.

http://www.dharmaoverground.org/web/guest/dharma-wiki/-/wiki/Main/MCTB+Morality,+The+First+and+Last+Training


Entry: Tackling it at the root, 3C
Date: Mon Nov  2 21:17:14 EST 2015

My current experience is overflowing with dissatisfaction, and a
search for satisfaction.  Very uncomfortable.  Deeply embedded in
ignorance.

To turn that around, look at each sensation and notice that it does
not satisfy.

In conditioned phenomena,
No permanence,
No satisfaction,
No self.




Entry: Conditioned
Date: Mon Nov  2 21:20:46 EST 2015

Meaning: depends on something else for its existence.

So the unconditioned is what remains if all conditioned phenomena are
removed.

http://newbuddhist.com/discussion/8433/what-is-conditioned-phenomena



Entry: Strong sit
Date: Tue Nov  3 07:17:45 EST 2015

Woke up confused at night, went to sit with ear plugs and blinds.  Got
much deeper this way - seems that the traffic noise somehow distracts.
This might be useful as a raft to discard later.

Formless territory.  After effects - a buzz - lasted very long after
going back to bed.  Slept like a rose.



Entry: Ass kicked
Date: Tue Nov  3 15:00:53 EST 2015

Today feels totally wrong.  I just can't put myself to do anything.
The traffic outside is really getting on my nerves.

Been here before.  Core thing is aversion: I *really* don't want to
(or can't?) put in the mental effort to do this work right now.  I'm
doing anything else to keep my mind of things, including constructive
and not-so-constructive displacement activity / procrastination.

A strong feeling is also the shame over getting into this state: why
is this happening?  Why can't I just sit down and do this?

It's more like I can't.  Memory is failing.  Oversight is gone.  I
have to look up everything.  Similar to be debilitated by fear.


Entry: Cycle continues
Date: Thu Nov  5 10:30:31 EST 2015

Yesterday tired due to stress.  Didn't sleep well.  Today is much like
Tuesday.  Strong aversion to everything.  Strong feeling that what is
needed is just to push through, but the affinity for drama is too
high.

Traffic is getting on my nerves again.


Entry: Better
Date: Thu Nov  5 16:07:20 EST 2015

Got back into work until intrinsic motivation came back (how to
trigger that?).  Then aversion dropped below a level where it wasn't
manageable.  How to get out of this when it's actually going on?  It's
quite horrible from the inside...  Is it just waiting or sitting?


Entry: Subjectivity
Date: Thu Nov  5 16:09:15 EST 2015

Maybe my interest in consciousness is re-awakened by having this wide
spectrum of neurotic experiences.  All these different insides feel
real when they are activated, so there is probably no "real" one.



Entry: Ingram's videos
Date: Thu Nov  5 12:31:49 EST 2015

Watching the rest.
 
So where am I at?  There is a possibility that the breakthrough early
2012 was not SE, but equanimity, and that after that I slid back?

Last two years have been quite horribly embedded, with strong aversion
to work and relationships.

The "self" has lost it's stranglehold, but aversion is still very
strong and is definitely the next challenge.



Entry: Unskillful action
Date: Fri Nov  6 08:36:26 EST 2015

Maybe a good way to go about this is to eliminate unskillful action in
the form of useless procrastination.  Basically, the internet.

All the other procrastination (doing the dishes, cleaning the house,
fixing things) essentially has to be done anyway so just being aware
of the avoidance should be good enough.

It's hard to see where the aversion comes from.  Basically because I'm
not taking those problems seriously: they consume a lot of time and
mental effort, and end up where I thought I already was: a place full
of problems missing that one unanticipated problem.  That's a core
problem, really.  Not accepting reality as it is.  Having the
arrogance to know how it is supposed to be.  Whatever that means
even..


Entry: Mindfulness in mundane work
Date: Sat Nov  7 13:45:54 EST 2015

So something has sunk in again, that this concentration/awareness game
is important.  It is also very difficult.  Some things:

- I experience difficulty staying focused on the immedate present when
  doing maintenance work.  Today that was doing the dishes, cleaning
  the basement, grinding up branches in the yard.  It starts out fine
  until thoughts start to transport me elsewhere, and annoyance with
  the task at hand rises.
   
- Connectedness is key.  This is severly missing at this time.

- Brain work creates a lot of aversion in my current state (fatigue,
  burnout?).


Entry: Burnout
Date: Sat Nov  7 13:50:40 EST 2015

Trying to find out what is key here.  One, I'm bored.  There is
nothing interesting in the tasks I need to do.  In fact there is a
profound feeling of having done this before, and failing, or at least
going through a long stretch of things that "shouldn't be problematic
to begin with".

Maybe it is just misplaced judgement?

So beside boredom, there are some things under the surface that are
masked by the aversion: fear (of failure), disgust (by the error-prone
approach taken).

There is also a noticable absence of curiosity.  It's that "been
there, suffered before, will suffer again" is dulling involvement.


Entry: Ambition
Date: Sat Nov  7 13:58:58 EST 2015

Is a problem.
It is the arrogance of wanting to solve a problem of choice,
and reap the benefits of doing that,
while the real challenge is to solve the problem at hand,
and reap no benefit at all.
Just the next thing that it uncovers.


Entry: Keeping busy
Date: Sat Nov  7 14:14:17 EST 2015

One of the things to be aware of is the pattern of getting into
displacement activity: doing things that are not helpful, other than
taking up space to displace mental discomfort.



Entry: Work
Date: Sat Nov  7 17:51:07 EST 2015

So what to do about it?
Approach each problem as a blank piece of paper?
Beginner mind?
Might be a useful trick.



Entry: Simpler day
Date: Sat Nov  7 17:53:02 EST 2015

(mostly) eliminating internet news has been very useful today.
Mostly, in that it is fairly automatic, but what i can do is realize and drop it.

Eliminating frantic displacement activity is another.
It also happens automatic, and also can be dropped.

No coffee.  Seems to have a large effect: less stress.

Take a nap.  The absence of coffee introduces snooze-ready moments.

Read a book.  It doesn't allow for that "oh, let's look this up quickly" thing.




Entry: reobservation?
Date: Tue Nov 17 15:44:37 EST 2015

http://www.dharmaoverground.org/dharma-wiki/-/wiki/Main/MCTB+10.+Re-observation/en

"You see, Re-observation is actually all fluff and no substance, but
if you confuse fluff for substance, the effect will be the same as if
it actually had substance."


I'm having a hard time, and it all feels very neurotic, as in creating
the problem by engaging the aversion.  It feels as if everything is
wrong, nothing is enjoyable and there is no way out.

"... very frustrating, as we wonder how many times we have to learn
these lessons before they stick."



Entry: Giving in
Date: Tue Nov 24 22:07:09 EST 2015

Things are going better lately, that is, the "stuff".

Meditation isn't progressing much because I guess I don't really
practice apart from trying to go to bare sensate level whenever i
catch myself getting lost in the stuff.  That seems to be the most
important thing to do: to cultivate the dayly chores mindfulness,
because that's whare the mind chatter usually takes off.

Days are difficult though.  Maybe it is just the distraction - the
traffic is still getting to me in those times.  I'm feeling a lot of
guilt lately.

Another emotional run-in this evening.  One of those escalations...
Bane of the last couple of years.  I still don't understand why it
keeps happening.  The mechanism is clear (reaction, anger,
amplification, misunderstanding, unequal values and strong
attachments, judgement, resentment, inability to accept reality).  But
still it just takes off.  Still it feels every time that anger might
force resolution this time.

Anyway, the encounter leaves me feeling quite depressed after an
otherwise ok day.  It is clear though that the feeling of helplesness,
hopelesness is just a rising emotion like any other, and that it is
the giving in to that emotion, the emabracing of it as realy, is what
makes the difference between a spiralling down and a, beh, it will
pass.

Remembering that is not easy.

As my brother said quoting a Pema Chodron book:
"there's this one thing we keep forgetting".



Entry: Stuff
Date: Tue Nov 24 23:07:41 EST 2015

So maybe it is time to step out of all of that neurotic stuff.



Entry: self is that which is identified as morally good
Date: Mon Dec 28 04:38:59 CET 2015

self is the identification with the good bits?
http://edge.org/panel/headcon-13-part-viii



Entry: new tricks
Date: Mon Jan 25 15:40:03 EST 2016

Troublesome times again.  I need a system.

- eat
- take a shower
- put noise canceler on
- stare out the window



Entry: the rat race
Date: Tue Mar  8 12:30:59 EST 2016

It's been a while, and I fell of the wagon again, deeply immersed in
the chase of intellectual gratification.  And knocked off my feet
regularly as the desire for success can not be satisfied according to
expectation.

I find it very hard to sit down.  Very strong aversion.




Entry: obsession
Date: Wed Mar 16 12:55:32 EDT 2016

not really about meditation, but about absorbtion into conditional
phenomena i guess..

pattern: i need to do a task that has no intrinsic interest to me,
making it hard to get motivated to start. once started, some intrinsic
interest is discovered, flow is entered, and a sequences of days of
fully absorbed work is engaged, leading to burnout.  however, whenever
that sequence is broken, complete motivation is lost, possibliy
realizing the destructive nature of the obsessive streak.

what to do about this?


Entry: compromise
Date: Wed Mar 16 12:59:24 EDT 2016

often leads to resentment if it was made to avoid conflict.


Entry: engagement
Date: Wed Mar 16 13:20:44 EDT 2016

Slipping into a low cycle.  Trying to stay on top of it.  Symptoms:
disappointment, disconnection, overwhelm, inability to focus, lack of
interest, lack of long-term perspective.  Negative-selective memories
(everything is shit).

I'm still at a point where cognitively, I know this is a temporary
state, but it feels impossible to escape as there are so many bats
that hit me in the head when i try out a different direction.
Basically, nothing works, and a sense of hopelessness sets in.

Maybe the hopelesness is key here.  Giving into that seems to start
the waterfall.  Keep trying?

That seems to jolt things a little.  Do not give up.



Entry: no engagement
Date: Sun Mar 27 21:10:43 EDT 2016

in anything.
nothing satisfies.
and rapid cycling.
this is all starting to look a lot like old shit.
maybe there is a way to get out of it with meditation afer all...

(that took 11 days to reoccur).



Entry: so what works?
Date: Mon Mar 28 13:46:01 EDT 2016

got through it.  what worked yesterday was:

1. do not give up, give in
2. be vulnerable

yesterday, 1 put me back on the road, then 2 caused the emotional clot
to wash through, and make room for sentiment.

from this, it seems that two mechanisms keep it alive: giving in to
the despair, e.g. taking it as a reality, and shielding oneself from
anything that might create a strong emotional response.  it is
important to *experience* the emotion, to let it move along.


Entry: anxiety and depression
Date: Mon Mar 28 17:39:42 EDT 2016

Not the dharma, but interesting nonetheless.

https://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/theory-knowledge/201603/anxiety-and-depression-are-symptoms-not-diseases




Entry: Go into the pain
Date: Tue May 10 15:47:29 EDT 2016

Experiencing a lot of pain caused by second order desire (wanting
people to want things / be a certain way).  Not sure why but the
disappointment that brings is interfering with my ability to think
straight.

Did a meditation, going into the pain.  And what is there, is love.
An all the shit that comes with it: anger, disappointment,
misalignment, judgement, ...

Kind of done with all of it, but don't know what to do.  Want to keep
the love but ditch all the crap.  Might not be possible...

Again, strong attachment to expectation and judgment are key.

What is clear is that my reference point got messed up over time.



Entry: burnout
Date: Sun May 29 10:37:21 EDT 2016

I think I've reached the where I can no longer ignore it.

https://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/high-octane-women/201311/the-tell-tale-signs-burnout-do-you-have-them


Entry: depression
Date: Fri Jul  8 19:46:33 EDT 2016

The reduction of everything to no want, no interest.
The inability to take action, even if known that action will improve situation.


Entry: Thin Slices of Anxiety - Catherine Lepage
Date: Sun Jul 17 13:40:06 EDT 2016

https://www.brainpickings.org/2016/06/23/thin-slices-of-anxiety-catherine-lepage/


Entry: Happiness for the Rationalist
Date: Sat Jul 23 17:43:14 EDT 2016

A lot of the points on this list make me feel unfomfortable, because
somehow I resent or resist them.  The introversion bit quite strongly.
Probably an indication that they might actually work.

Flow has been my pilar.  If that drops out, usually moving towards
burning out, I'm miserable.

http://lesswrong.com/lw/4su/how_to_be_happy/



Entry: Triggers
Date: Fri Aug  5 11:27:55 EDT 2016

Here's two parts that clearly knock me off my feet, into the spiral:
- Working very hard and not reaching closure
- Dealing with people being "wrong" or "incompetent"

Both of these are soaked in expectation.  Of self and of others..
Both lead to a situation where all my mental energy is drained, and
all that is left is a strong feeling of hopelessness.

The draining happens through fighting, pushing, through working
outside of the mechanism of flow, which doesn't need any push.


I simply do not have a coping mechanism for being mentally drained,
except for sleeping - but that doesn't work on caffeine.


The main symptom is lack of interest in anything.  The main cure is
letting go of everything and waiting for that spark to return as it
always does, even if every time it looks like it doesn't.


The problem with this state is really the quality that there is no way
out, that it is entrapment.


Entry: Burnout
Date: Sat Aug  6 09:51:53 EDT 2016

https://www.1843magazine.com/features/minds-turned-to-ash

  We commonly use the term "burnout" to describe the state of
  exhaustion suffered by the likes of Steve. It occurs when we find
  ourselves taken over by this internal protest against all the
  demands assailing us from within and without, when the momentary
  resistance to picking up a glass becomes an ongoing state of mind.

  ...

  The relationship to stress and anxiety is crucial, for it
  distinguishes burnout from simple exhaustion. Run a marathon, paint
  your living room, catalogue your collection of tea caddies, and the
  tiredness you experience will be infused with a deep satisfaction
  and faintly haloed in smugness - feelings that confirm you've
  discharged your duty to the world for at least the remainder of the
  day.

  The exhaustion experienced in burnout combines an intense yearning
  for this state of completion with the tormenting sense that it
  cannot be attained, that there is always some demand or anxiety or
  distraction which can't be silenced.

  ...

  You feel burnout when you've exhausted all your internal resources,
  yet cannot free yourself of the nervous compulsion to go on
  regardless. Life becomes something that won't stop bothering you.
  Among its most frequent and oppressive symptoms is chronic
  indecision, as though all the possibilities and choices life
  confronts you with cancel each other out, leaving only an irritable
  stasis.

  ...

  In previous generations, depression was likely to result from
  internal conflicts between what we want to do and what authority
  figures - parents, teachers, institutions - wish to prevent us from
  doing. But in our high-performance society, it's feelings of
  inadequacy, not conflict, that bring on depression.

  ...

  Burnout is not simply a symptom of working too hard. It is also the
  body and mind crying out for an essential human need: a space free
  from the incessant demands and expectations of the world.




Entry: time to reboot
Date: Mon Aug 15 15:17:32 EDT 2016

Back at the "everything is too much effort" stage.
I really don't know how to live without working until I drop...



Entry: Love/hate work
Date: Fri Sep  2 15:48:45 EDT 2016

Entirely dependent on the ability to appreciate, which stems mostly
from ability to understand.

Sometimes, there is only stupid.  For whatever reason...  And stupid
with the assumption of not-stupid creates a lot of grief.



Entry: Snap
Date: Wed Sep  7 23:21:21 EDT 2016

Something went wrong again today.  Might be triggered by the heat and
resentment wrt. work and chores, but left with a feeling of
disinterest and a strong desire to drink.


Entry: Stuck
Date: Fri Sep  9 02:49:58 EDT 2016

The thing to remember: "normal" will come back.  Can't sleep.  Might
still be heat and humidity...  Completely unable to focus on
anything...  So much of my perception of wellbeing seems to hinge on
the ability to think.

It still amazes me how permanent and unescapable this state can feel.
As if there is really no hope to ever enjoy life again.


Entry: Cut through
Date: Fri Sep  9 11:10:59 EDT 2016

So looks like I made it to the point of obvious ridiculousness.  The
point where it is obvious that navel-gazing is at the core.  Not sure
how - it just happened.




Entry: motivation
Date: Fri Sep 23 12:40:59 EDT 2016

Burned out.  All motivation is extrinsic at this point.  Would like to
stop for a while, but that doesn't seem like it is possible -- not
sure what it solves either.

Problem is expectation, perception.  Still a lot of not-so-interesting
work to do...  Product is complex.  When I stop working for 2 weeks
I've forgotten most of the lore needed to continue development and
testing.

Basically, I need to keep this going, bootstrap motivation (once a
problem becomes interesting, there is no motivation problem).


Main symptom: the "background brightness" is gone.  As if it is just
switched off.  Same old.

What works is to kick-start that part by doing something interesting,
relevant.



So I can't seem to get through.  Tired, mostly.  Can't think.  Can't
be bothered.  Maybe just trust that it will pass.  And rest..



Entry: sit
Date: Wed Oct  5 23:05:12 EDT 2016

made peace with the cars on the road
felt deep glow of love
felt fear drop away
tears of pain lifted

absurdity of monkey business so clear from that vantage point.

what is it that pulls me into that world?  the gratification of the
temporary feeling of control?  it's bound to fall apart again anyway,
but underneath that all there is love.



Entry: alone
Date: Thu Oct  6 21:08:38 EDT 2016

spending a couple of days alone

i see what i need.  retreats _and_ reunions.  a more balanced life.
a more balanced attitude towards community and isolation.



Entry: Fear - point vs. line
Date: Tue Oct 11 01:29:29 EDT 2016

Fear is a center thing, and can be washed away by a flow thing.
Spreading out in time and space helps.

Fear is always about an imagined point in the future.

What is hard about standing next to fear instead of inside it, is that
it is taken as real.  The imagined future point of realization of
intense discomfort.



Entry: two states
Date: Mon Oct 24 00:54:12 EDT 2016

So it's fairly clear that I have two main states of being,
corresponding to sentiment being "online" or "powered down" - let's
call them heart and mind state.

Both states are aware of each other, but are not "friends", and feel
like different personalities.

Transitioning between these two states happens gradually from heart ->
mind, e.g. during work, getting gradually more obsessive and attached.
Transition the other way is more sudden, often through conversation or
reading or other strong insight of having lost something.  Anger can
cause sudden change in the other direction.

The mind state's mantra is "no need for this sentimental bullshit".
It seems to know that it cannot survive meditation, so actively
resists it.  Both feel embarrasment for each other.

Both have their role to play, but the mind state can escalate into
aloof obsession, while the heart state is more naturally stable, but
can be taken over by something that peaks intellectual curiosity.

In mind state, empathy is absent, and strong emotions in other people
can feel highly threatening, pushing away.  In heart state empathy is
functional and same emotions can cause feelings of compassion.

I can't willingly switch between states.  Nor do I want to if the
condition is pronounced.

Mind state is more common after waking up, heart state more just
before going to bed.


What I'm describing seems to be
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Emotional_detachment




Entry: Scott Adams 
Date: Sat Nov 26 21:06:13 EST 2016

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NJCJpmUAy0s

All of our issues are psychological.  Once you've got food and nobody
is shooting at you, your problems tend to be mental.



Entry: Jordan Peterson
Date: Mon Dec  5 15:13:31 EST 2016

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=04wyGK6k6HE&t=3753s
http://jordanbpeterson.com/
http://selfauthoring.com/

"Maps of meaning"
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4tQOlQRp3gQ
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rM8JsibkrI8
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mO9LUWs5M60

esp part 2
"people do not have ideas. ideas have people."  (Jung)

paraphrased: look at what you are saying, does it make you feel
powerful or weak?  if latter, it's false! don't say things that are
not true.



Entry: Alcohol
Date: Thu Dec  8 11:07:06 EST 2016

Incredible how polarized the experience is.  Day after, dull and
somewhat depressed.  Clearly in regret about having to pay a whole
day.

The experience itself was filled with happiness, with lots of memories
to alcohol-fueled bonding moments, a clear feeling of wanting to
connect to people.



Entry: insight
Date: Sat Dec 10 22:29:09 EST 2016

It is clear that I am not doing well.  Self-sabotage, and escapism.
How to bring back awareness that I need to face problems, not evade them?

EDIT: waking up next morning, it's clear I don't want to face
anything.  Just explore, wander the impolsove path, chasing curiosity
gratification without thinking too hard, without forcing it.  Maybe
just tired of "work", i.e. going down a chores list..




Entry: thread
Date: Tue Dec 13 21:49:32 EST 2016

There is no thread through my story.  It gets nuked by depression from
time to time, then re-emerges in different form from the ashes.

If this is the case, what is the significance of that story?
Attempting to let it go leaves me confused.



Entry: intellectual discomfort and overwhelm
Date: Tue Dec 13 23:46:46 EST 2016

It is painful to (be forced) to learn about something you don't know
anything about, while you perceive you do not have adequate time to do
so.

However, it is seems to be always possible to set aside the emotion
(overwhelm), and focus on marginal gain: what is the (completely
feasible) action to take that is the most effective to get to part of
the goal?

This has to go together with the acceptance that it might be entirely
possible that the full goal does not get reached.  This is OK.  It is
however not OK to give up and go completely bankrupt without trying to
make a cool-headed attempt.

This is something I have never actually learned while growing up.
Maybe because ultimately, I was able to pass the bar by just relying
on emotional impulses, fear, hubris, and plain old enjoyment of the
job. I've reached a point though where a more rational assesment of
self-imposed obstacles is imperative.



Entry: border of chaos
Date: Fri Dec 16 22:01:24 EST 2016

Jordan Peterson: Reality and the Sacred
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2c3m0tt5KcE

The optimally meaningful life is to be found on the border between
chaos and order.

You're secure enough to be confident, but not so secure that you're
bored, and you're interested enough to be awake, but not so interested
that you're terrified.  Then time slips by you and you are no longer
self-conscious.



Entry: depression linked to dominance hierarchy?
Date: Wed Dec 21 18:55:07 EST 2016

From Peterson's lectures.

Looking for a reference, this turned up:
https://www.huxley.net/rankmood/

depression: yielding component of ritual agonistic conflict
mania: mania evolved as the winning component of ritual agonistic behaviour

Group-living individuals [...] require more prolonged and complex
winning and losing subroutines, for a loser may have to give up a
position in the hierarchy that he has held for many years.



Entry: humor
Date: Mon Dec 26 22:40:38 EST 2016

Is the purpose of humor to counteract fear?

Fear comes from emulating undesireable futures through rational
thought, and humor undermines rational thought through absurdity.



Entry: episodes
Date: Wed Dec 28 01:07:40 EST 2016

micro-depressions?
not sure what triggered them.  just a couple of hours.
quick onset, quick drop.

meanwhile i feel puzzled why it happens, knowing (trusting?) that it
will flip again, but feeling fearful by not knowing when, and feeling
frustrated by not being able to control it.

empathy and other social emotions seem to be part of the drop.  not
sure if it is cause or effect, this time watching tv.


Thinking... maybe this is defeat-triggered.  Something did happen
today that might be triggering those circuits..





Entry: overwhelm and thought shutdown
Date: Fri Dec 30 16:55:07 EST 2016

The "bug" I am stuck at: inability to focus on the problem due to
inability to find an entry point.

This presents itself as despair: "it's no use", "its too hard".

Is there wisdom in looking closer at these emotions to see when
exactly they get triggered?

One of the interesting patterns is that I find no joy in giving up.
The pervasive feeling of being defeated takes away interest in
everything.  How to break through that?

Another intresting pattern is that once this feeling of defeat gets
pierced, I have courage to try again, only to be defeated again very
soon after realizing the task is too big.



Entry: greed and aversion, second path fetters
Date: Sat Dec 31 17:11:37 EST 2016

Maybe, let's just go with it.  It makes sense.  Greed and aversion are
still very much present and basically dominate my life.  Not in the
most obvious sense (stuff, money), but w.r.t. that human currency:
attention.

http://www.dharmaoverground.org/discussion/-/message_boards/message/2907796


The main thing is that there are not many things that I really want or
really hate, but for those that do trigger the sentiment, I am all
lost.




Entry: dream
Date: Sat Dec 31 18:14:54 EST 2016

Watched "Her" movie.  Reminded of how important it is to dream, to
have something to aspire to.  And love is the thing that makes it all
possible.



Entry: stubbornness
Date: Sun Jan  1 15:43:22 EST 2017

What is the evolutionary purpose of stubbornness?  The inability to
submit to an undesired state of reality?


Entry: relevance, interest, motivation
Date: Tue Jan  3 21:07:18 EST 2017

It remains a problem.  Will power only goes so far.  It would be nice
to find a way to trick curiosity, because when it comes down to
intellectual work, does it really matter?

Maybe a big part of the problem is having created the problems...  A
normal thing to do then is to just drop everything.  I would assume
that in the environment our emotional machine was evolved, this would
be the thing to do.  Some things just take too damn long to complete,
and it becomes effectively infinite, leading to a "trapped" situation.

Maybe the insight is that curiosity disappears when the promise of
reward disappears?  E.g. nothing interesting is likely to happen.
Hard to express this non-circularly!


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Curiosity



Entry: Rogers
Date: Sat Jan  7 00:49:35 EST 2017

https://books.google.com/books?id=dj5z7vVGxuwC&pg=PA265&lpg=PA265&dq=%22the+next+time+you+get+into+an+argument%22&source=bl&ots=04sWYnZw8b&sig=52re7wUEbntXjQQpZKVNedfyfLo&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjF7Ov2qq_RAhUi_4MKHaFiAuYQ6AEIKTAD#v=onepage&q=%22the%20next%20time%20you%20get%20into%20an%20argument%22&f=false

https://youtu.be/V9Ql5V7-OQo?t=3893

http://www4.uwsp.edu/english/mbowman/Argument/Rogers.pdf

"Each person can speak up for himself only after he has first restated
the ideas and feelings of the previous speaker accurately, and to that
speakers satisfaction.


Entry: imitation to understanding
Date: Sun Jan  8 16:41:01 EST 2017

... is the path of becoming wise.  can't do anything practical without
imitation of existing patterns, but can't become wise without
understanding how those patterns came to be.


Entry: There is more space inside your head than outside your head.
Date: Thu Jan 19 00:01:16 CET 2017

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RdNJTP6tYMs&t=1484



Entry: One of those days again..
Date: Wed Feb  8 16:03:52 EST 2017

Nothing I can do.  Brain simply doesn't work.  Memory is broken,
insight and oversight are gone.  Only bad decisions come out.

Reason?  Probably a consequence of a bad night sleep, getting
interrupted, and feeling utterly disappointed by how hard this work is
to get under control.

What I want to do is to fix the mess, simplify, because frankly I
can't work with it when I'm in this reduced mental state, and I can't
fix it either because that requires even more insight.



Entry: Criticize your own doubts
Date: Sun Feb 12 18:25:56 EST 2017

From Jordan Peterson:

    The other thing that people have a hard time with is that they are
    not very good at criticizing their own doubts.  Someone will be
    doing something and a stray thought will come into mind "Well what
    the hell is the point of this?".  And because it comes with a
    negative emotional punch and some power they think "Oh yeah that
    is definitely true".  It's not, it's just some chattering dabbling
    in your head that makes the same stupid criticisms to everyone.
    Just because it's negative, doesn't mean it's true.

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HcEJr8h_yGM&t=1s



Entry: Motivation vs. Discipline
Date: Mon Feb 13 20:13:17 EST 2017

Yes, it's time again.  Loosing the battle.
Ran into nerdfittness - might be worth a try.

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oD3wXyAfyD8

Fuck motivation.  Cultivate discipline.

Now this is definitely a personality trait.



Entry: Thinking and Speaking
Date: Tue Feb 14 20:39:56 EST 2017

"You must let people speak.  Most people do not know what they think
until they speak."

He also mentions this exposes internal inconsistencies.  This I've
seen clearly in me speaking about politics.  As I never write about
it, and rarely speak, it is as he says: at the point the words come
out of my mouth, I often realize my argument is ill-conceived.

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=G59QpvdQa5w



Entry: identity
Date: Fri Feb 17 15:23:12 EST 2017

So what is this thing, besides a tool for making social interactions
work?  To give people a set of options along which to classify you.

The thing is, I'm getting very annoyed by any form of identification I
see in others.  I am this or I am that.  It can be a useful tool, but
often is taken as a much more central idea, and I can't really condone
that, nor humor it.  I feel pretty strong about it too.  Weird.




Entry: too agreeable
Date: Sat Feb 18 22:39:39 EST 2017

Peterson on being too agreeable:

- People need assertiveness training.  They're too naive and they
  can't stand up for themselves.  Be less compassionate and more
  honest.

- You can tell if you're too compassionate because you're resentful.
  You have some things to say and you're not sayig them.


https://youtu.be/pcNInM6Gf5k?t=3180


Entry: Depression and "I"
Date: Sun Mar  5 06:28:37 EST 2017

After about 40 minutes in
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hJ4JEypNH2s

It is mentioned that depression correlates with the use of the pronoun
"I" in written word.  That depression is a disease of overly
self-focused attention.



Entry: On speaking the truth
Date: Sun Mar  5 18:29:17 EST 2017

Yeah this guy is remarkable.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=27dshxbbPlg

On lying being the worst thing you can do to people.
It warps their reality.

At 46:00

"One of the most useful psychological excercises that anyone can ever
do: Start with the assumption that many the things you think and say
aren't yours, and that you don't believe them.  They're just things
that you've picked up for one reason or another as you've walked
through life, and you brandish them like markers of your status.  But
they aren't really you.  Because what is really you is hard to figure
out.  So you have to start from that assumption.  Then start listening
to what you say.  And feeling what you say as well.  And here's the
rule.  It's a very simple rule.  Pay attention to whether what you say
makes you feel stronger, or weaker.  If it makes you feel stronger,
then you can keep saying it.  But if it makes you feel weaker then you
should stop saying it.  Stop saying it right away.  If you can
reformulate your words.  So that when you restate them that feeling of
integrity and strength reappears.  And you can feel it really down the
middle of your body.  And because what happens when you're saying
something that's untrue is that you dissociate to some degree.
Because part of you agrees with it and part of you doesn't.  It's that
you're splitting your psyche."

"Like cognitive dissonance"

"Yes it's very much like cognitive dissonance.  But if you pay very
close attention to what you say, you can feel yourself coming into
alignment if you get the words right.  And when you're in alignment
like that you're centered in your being.  If you're centered in your
being, you can withstand suffering without becoming corrupted.  And
that's what people want when they say they want meaningful lives.
They mean 'I want to be somewhere where I can stand powerfully.'  And
withstand the onslaught of life with its deaths and its tragedies and
all the things that are associated with it.  And you can learn to
speak from the bottom of your soul.  And if you do that, there's
nothing better than that."




Entry: The problem is in rooting in mental being
Date: Tue Mar 14 00:06:54 EDT 2017

Being is more general.  Why these traps?  In times when I can't think
clearly, why is there so much resentment to just be in that state?

Every morning since about a week or so, I wake up being embedded in
things I have to do.  To such extent that it takes away all the joy.
Where did this go so wrong?

All I see is chaos.

So all I can do, is tackle that chaos, one bit at a time.



Entry: Harris & Harris on meditation
Date: Wed Apr  5 16:32:16 EDT 2017

2:39:00

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=S4utkb6vSyQ


Entry: Social kids
Date: Wed May 17 01:52:14 CEST 2017

Between 2 and 3, a kid learns to play a game with another person:
develop the ability to share a frame of reference.

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fola6I9q61U



Entry: Weirdness - Shamed for the most?
Date: Thu Oct 19 00:44:16 CEST 2017

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=79zra755WgA
- enthusiasm
- naivety, being wrong with conviction
- anything sexual

What's most weird?

Conformity in both conformance and rejection.



Entry: Practice
Date: Sun Oct 22 19:28:57 CEST 2017

Time to get started again.  19:30, practice until 20:00

The no-self door is visual
The suffering door is aversion.
The impermanence door is unclear, maybe audiory?

What is lacking is concentration.
Gets better after sitting for half an hour.  Things do quiet down.


Points of interest: visual no-self (figure/ground), and
suffering/aversion and resentment.

Also quite spaced out.  Memory is failing me.


This really brought a lot of quiet. No interest in twitter.



And then the insight: I'm grateful of living with such a difficult
partner, as she clearly brings out the need for me to cultivate
compassion and be aware of resentment and expectation :)

EDIT: Another half hour sit 21:30 to 22:00.

More jahnic. Really spaced out now. Followed aversion, shame which
catapulted me into high concentration with flashy stars. Asked for
visit. Felt some familiar presence for a couple of seconds.


EDIT: After, restless and fear. Might also be the gigantic amount of
chocolate I ate..



Entry: Conformity knowledge
Date: Sun Oct 22 21:17:34 CEST 2017

Deconstructing every element -- the 10/20Hz thing.

Doing this with sounds seems possible.

Doing this with vision seems to make no sense.


EDIT: Visual: look at the details, and that there are many of them.
Also helps to look at moving things.



Entry: Morning sit
Date: Mon Oct 23 11:03:33 CEST 2017

10:45 started 30 mins, but stopped after 20.

Unable to concentrate. Drank 3 coffees. Brain is going
everywhere. Tried to observe it but ultimately stepped away.

Pattern is consistent: inability to stomach any kind of discomfort.
Or put differently: discomfort triggers strong impulse to avoidance.



Entry: Difficult people
Date: Mon Oct 23 15:21:31 CEST 2017

There are a couple of those in my life these days...  Get me agitated
in an instant.

Two things: 1. observe the anger reaction -- there is much to learn
here, and 2. be more skillful in finding a balance between not putting
up with people's shit, and being patient when things simply go wrong
while the other end is actually searching for a middle ground and not
just being an ass.






Entry: Some kinds of suffering are hard to deconstruct
Date: Wed Oct 25 23:16:43 CEST 2017

Any kind of suffering puts me back into strong identification.  Trying
to put it in words in MCTB-speak: seeing that visual, auditory, touch
are not self is possible, but seeing the components in suffering is not.

Example: sitting down in meditation, wandering off, and not wanting to
go back to concentration because it is too painful.  "I can't be
bothered.".

At that point it is even hard to imagine that the point of the
exercise is to deconstruct the "fused" construct, the entire "woe me"
state, into their components.

It is now easier to do this for anger, resentment, shame, fear unless
it is very direct.  I.e. anxiety because it is often linked to some
desire, and making the desire explicit makes breaks the feedback loop.


But I can't seem to do this for moments when concentration is hard to
achieve.  The sensations that make up the suffering get clouded by the
entirety.


Entry: Programming, working, doing chores
Date: Thu Oct 26 00:51:31 CEST 2017

The resentment that comes with that is a prime specimen of the
unpenetrated glob of senstations that is identified as self: I don't
want this.

EDIT (next morning): So it's all nice and dandy to write down the
intention; to actually do it is something completely different.  At
this point, I'm squarely in the "I don't want to think hard" embedded
construct.

EDIT: The problem is to distinguish between laziness (unwillingness to
get motivated) and tiredness (physical inability to hold a set of
concepts in working memory for insights to form).  For the latter it
is often enough to just give it a couple of minutes of rest.  For the
former, which feels similar, rest doesn't work, but stepping outside
of the "woe is me" part does.



Entry: Solid suffering
Date: Thu Oct 26 19:55:17 CEST 2017

The suffering (just aversion, really) feels solid.  Deconstructing
that in a way similar to other sensations is the task at hand.  I
don't really find a way in...  Started a sit 5 minutes ago, and
writing this as an "important intermezzo".

So maybe go to the maps.  This is reobservation or dissolution.  I had
fear clearly this afternoon and late last night, so it is possible
this is reobservation.  The key there is to see through the
bombardment.  To not give up.

What am I doing?  Giving up.  Finding excuses.

Back to sit.

Ok. So I sat/reclined it out.. But that's it. Nowhere near any form of
concentration.

EDIT: Trying to describe it. Not wanting to listen, read,
think. Wanting to bliss out, get excited and come, wanting to read
news feeds. I'm going to need to call this something because it is so
clear.  What about "the fog" ?


Entry: So what next
Date: Thu Oct 26 22:58:29 CEST 2017

- eliminate distractions
- when the fog comes, sit and observe it, deconstruct it
- set intention. this needs to go somewhere, be directed.
- stay on the cusion, do the time



Entry: map
Date: Thu Oct 26 23:01:33 CEST 2017

https://www.dharmaoverground.org/dharma-wiki/-/wiki/Main/MCTB+The+Progress+of+Insight

The Pre-Vipassana Stages, 1st Vipassana Jhana #

1. Mind and Body
2. Cause and Effect
3. The Three Characteristics

The 2nd Vipassana Jhana #

4. The Arising and Passing Away

The 3rd Vipassana Jhana, The Dukkha anas, The Dark Night #

5. Dissolution
6. Fear
7. Misery
8. Disgust
9. Desire for Deliverance
10. Re-observation

The 4th Vipassana Jhana #

11. Equanimity
12. Conformity
13. Change of Lineage
14. Path 

Nirvana (first of two meanings) #

15. Fruition

Review #

16. Review



Entry: improving concentration
Date: Thu Oct 26 23:05:49 CEST 2017

https://www.wikihow.com/Improve-Your-Concentration

- reset
- diet
- exercise

- one thing at a time, to completion (dont context-switch)

Exercises:
- upper body dumbbels
- thighs & calfs


Entry: observing the fog
Date: Thu Oct 26 23:20:18 CEST 2017

That's a nice battle cry.
The irony is that the fog is the not engaging, it's the boredom and the laziness.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sloth_(deadly_sin)
"habitual disinclination to exertion"


Entry: Kenneth's 100 clicks
Date: Thu Oct 26 23:24:47 CEST 2017

https://soundcloud.com/michael-taft-5/dy-001-am-i-mindful-right-now-with-guest-kenneth-folk

- completeness of small moments awareness more important than long sitting sessions
- watch body transitions in social situations
- intensity of directed attention  potentiates awakening
- "checking the box" intensity is boring, nothing for your mind to get into, while flow is the opposite
- if you want to get stronger, you have to lift the weights
- flow theory, goldilocks zone of attention (too easy vs too hard), meditation: adjust the difficulty to keep flow possible

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Satipatthana



Entry: Ok.. WTF
Date: Fri Oct 27 01:58:29 CEST 2017

So I start doing these exercises mentioned in the podcast before
falling asleep, and I wake up with intense negative emotions of
disapproval and judgement. (disgust?) 

https://www.dharmaoverground.org/dharma-wiki/-/wiki/Main/MCTB+9.+Desire+for+Deliverance



Entry: So really, the solution to "fog"
Date: Fri Oct 27 11:09:10 CEST 2017

I mentioned before I don't see whether the fog is due to boredom or
tackling a problem that is simply too hard.  Going back to what
Michael was saying about tuning difficulty to keep flow possible,
maybe that can also be done with the programming?

Often when I think the problem is easy and I'm just lazy, what is
really going on is that I do not see the full picture and
subconsciously realize it will be very very hard.



Entry: So it works
Date: Sat Oct 28 10:20:23 CEST 2017

But it has nothing to do with attainment.  Listened to episode 2 of
Michael Taft's podcast with Kenneth Folk, about the cosmic joke.  This
is it.  It cannot be anything other than this.

Did a less formal reclining noticing exercise.



Entry: Fog
Date: Sat Oct 28 20:57:03 CEST 2017

So the mud, and the fog, is that it too?



Entry: Taft & Folk 3
Date: Sat Oct 28 23:27:05 CEST 2017

Death denial.  Interesting points.  Human life is bikeshedding.
Kenneth is funny sometimes :)


When suffering -> Am I mindful? I don't know, let me check.

Then leads to "bandwidth use" in the investigation such that the
"Kenneth routine" can't run, which is enough to pop out of it for a
small amount of time.

Also compare first episode, refering to the arbiter checking if an
experience was 100% pure.  Then counting those on a clicker to reach
100 in a day.

Sounds a bit like HAIETMOBA.

Taft: Having a bad time?  Let's have a look at that, right now.
That's the move.


And about the german guy:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thomas_Metzinger

Taft: switching belief systems.



Entry: Life is Bikeshedding
Date: Fri Nov  3 07:46:08 EDT 2017

So true.  Spending time on getting infrastructure in order, while not
tackling the real issues that cause suffering because, well, they are
just too complicated.



Entry: Am I mindful right now?
Date: Sun Nov  5 08:41:23 EST 2017

Golf clicker counter arrived.  So let's give this thing a try.
http://deconstructingyourself.com/podcast/dy-001-mindful-right-now-guest-kenneth-folk

10:20 Profound mindfulness is always a punctuated event
11:47 Kenneths new mindfulness practice

Am I mindful?
I don't know, let me check.
And now I have to prove it.
So I say 3 things that prove that I am actually mindful.
. . .
And because my internal auditer is willing to sign off on that, I'm
going to give myself 3 attaboys.


- remembering to do the thing
- profound engagement



Entry: Perfectionism
Date: Sun Nov  5 09:30:41 EST 2017

It is a problem.  I spend a lot of time fretting over things not being
exactly the way I want them to be, not realizing the cost of that.




Entry: Clicker
Date: Mon Nov  6 13:44:17 EST 2017

In units of 3.  Goal is 100, so 33 units.  Harder than expected.

20171105,11

EDIT: 11/12 -- Surprisingly difficult to maintain this.  Feeling a lot
of resistance, but hard to stick with that resistance.  As mentioned
before, it really needs to be mined and deconstructed.



Entry: Small sit
Date: Sun Nov 12 21:58:02 EST 2017

Mostly concentration for 10 minutes, then switched to candle flame
which brought up some absorption state and calmed me down a bit.

Actually, that came after feeling overwhelming mass of undesirable
sensations, which then triggered a recognition of "might be all
fluff", which then allowed me to ease into it and get through to
absorption like state, but not clear-headed.

What I've noticed is that I am not in a position to do insight
practice in a state of unrest.  I do need to calm down and do some
form of concentration before I can even start.




Entry: Trying to "contain" experience
Date: Thu Nov 23 18:41:50 EST 2017

An attempt to explain.  Happens often after listening to music when
for some reason it goes off in some direction where I can't "contain"
it any longer, then disengage from it.

Likely this is just being tired, but there is something hidden
underneath.  Some strong aversion against not being able to classify
all the input.


Can I turn this into a practice?  Since it happens nearly every day.



Entry: Meaning and strong emotions
Date: Thu Nov 30 12:06:56 EST 2017

I wonder if they are really the same.  If meaning caused by is some
kind of temporary narrowing of goals caused by strong emotions.

In the absence of strong emotional drives, there is just awareness and
a sort of harmony with the flow of things.

Anyways, good to be aware of.  Desires for things to be a certain way.



Entry: selfindulgence
Date: Mon Dec  4 23:25:59 EST 2017

awareness of death is only cure
because that brings out love


Entry: resistance
Date: Mon Dec 11 23:34:59 EST 2017

Why do I resist meditation?
This keeps happening in periods.
Some ego self-defence or something.



Entry: That cloud
Date: Wed Dec 13 00:01:44 EST 2017

I wonder what it is, why it is there.
Have no sense of clarity.



Entry: concentration is inherently pleasurable
Date: Sat Jan  6 20:27:08 EST 2018

hard to remember that



Entry: Jeff Warren
Date: Sat Jan 13 23:42:53 EST 2018

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QtPs6Kuqjs0 around 1:00:00

About choosing the battles.  About not caring and letting go of
control to conserve energy to be able to act when it is necessary.



Entry: Holding on
Date: Tue Jan 30 00:01:22 EST 2018

Sometimes it is so clear that what is needed is to let go, but at the
same time it is also clear that that is not going to happen any time
soon.

In my cycle, I really need to reach the point of crisis before I can
sit and surrender.

Almost there...





Entry: Gary Weber
Date: Thu Feb 22 19:52:27 CET 2018

http://happiness-beyond-thought.com/

https://youtu.be/SOvdVjOtMXg
Some notes:
- surrender
- getting out of the way of process

https://youtu.be/EK8pcUt4gio


http://www.happiness-beyond-thought.com/tsc.html
- self-referential memories do not get stored




Entry: Better
Date: Thu Feb 22 23:26:13 CET 2018

Back home, feeling better overall.  Maybe it is just the social
contact?

What I notice is that it is absolutely not about content of
conversations, only about the feeling of belonging and being accepted.

Now, how to take that back?


Entry: On grasping
Date: Sat Feb 24 13:13:46 CET 2018

On 02/24/2018 01:05 PM, Antti Karttunen wrote:
>> One thing that seems to come with meditation is an arms race: your self
>> learns to fight for its life.
> "Self" or "ego" or ...?
> 
> https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thought_suppression

Something like that.

I'm not sure what words to use, but the behavioral pattern is clear in
my mind. I use the term "embedded" as it's closest to what seems to be
important: the fact that you are attached to the story and want to be
part of it.

The grasping seems to be there for a good reason: if you really let
go, the thing grasped completely disappears.  It's such a necessary
element that it makes good sence why these thoughts are so circular:
it's the only way this structure can be maintained on underlying
hardware that is mostly interested in cause and effect.

It's like how you implement an operating system in a functional
programming language: using tail recursive calls :)



Entry: On getting overwhelmed
Date: Mon Mar 12 10:20:29 EDT 2018

Main problem is still rooted in sensitivity to disapproval for
failure, combined with strong aversion to actually tackle the problem
in the current state.  This causes a stress feedback loop.

The most important bit is to fist break that cycle.



Entry: It is about stopping
Date: Fri Mar 30 09:35:38 EDT 2018

Somewhere in here:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2_acNtmiikY


Entry: Meaningness
Date: Tue May  8 23:55:50 EDT 2018

https://meaningness.com/misunderstanding-meaningness-makes-many-miserable

  Mission and materialism are not the only possibilities. You can,
  instead, do things that you enjoy and that are useful to others.



Entry: Seriously stuck
Date: Sun Jun  3 19:32:21 EDT 2018

Aversion. Escapism.



Entry: Bread
Date: Sun Jun  3 21:39:11 EDT 2018

https://www.seriouseats.com/recipes/2011/06/better-no-knead-bread-recipe.html

3 days.  maybe a good way to add some non-instant gratification to my daily process.


Entry: suchness, nondualism
Date: Thu Jul  5 00:41:36 EDT 2018

No matter, no mind: neither.
Mind is what is looking out from the inside.
Matter is what appears looking in from the outside.
1:14:30
http://deconstructingyourself.com/podcast/dy-022-stream-entry-with-guest-culadasa
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tath%C4%81t%C4%81



Entry: regain some insight
Date: Sat Aug 11 15:25:44 EDT 2018

Be ok with being tired and not being able to work much.  I've been
100% focused on work and study, exercise, which is wearing me out.

Don't take it all too serious.  Even if it all comes falling down,
there is life and joy after that.




Entry: anicca
Date: Sat Sep  1 15:53:07 EDT 2018

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Impermanence

Shinzen's "flow", and "gone".
https://www.youtube.com/watch?time_continue=1721&v=xF5V9r7_ZHI

The essence of noting.


Time to declutter.  Let's first create the space.

"You have to reach the point where every time you button your shirt or
tie your shoe laces you purify 5000 lifetimes of karma."

"Quotidien, neutral experiences.  To reach the point where that is a
purification simply means that you have such a complete experience of
that ordinary event that you taste purification within it.  It's a
limiting view that the only way you could purify consciousness is by
going through experiences that are intense and uncomfortable."


Going back to doing chores.  It's been the one place where thoughts
are going rampant, and where they cause discomfort.  I've otherwise
eliminated place for thought by doing inherently interesting
concentrated work.  Time to learn to concentrate on the mundane.



Entry: uncomfortable
Date: Mon Sep  3 14:02:45 EDT 2018

Nevertheless, do uncomfortable things.  In my case especially,
aversion is the main impediment.



Entry: Stuck in dark night?
Date: Wed Sep  5 13:31:53 EDT 2018

Maybe change the model from depression to this being a meditation
thing.  Everything is bleh.

Tricks that have worked before is to let it all in, instead of trying
to shield from unpleasant things.


Entry: Voices
Date: Wed Sep  5 22:10:35 EDT 2018

Maybe the antidote to getting overwhelmed with voices, opinions, is
letting them all in, absorbing all of humanity.



Entry: fear
Date: Sat Sep 15 09:09:03 EDT 2018

Before: don't want to, after: should have.
Rinse, repeat.

Fear is the thing that overrides all the other driving emotions.

It is increadibly divisive, creating a constant should i / should i
not tension.  Once the fear dissipates, it is obvious that i should
have.  While it is present, it will likely win out.

Override.



Entry: emptiness
Date: Sat Sep 15 15:56:29 EDT 2018

So basically, there is no intrinsic quality to anything.  Even the
things you "like".  There is only the arising of sentiments triggered
while performing the "enjoyable" experience.  The confusion that
arises when those feelings do not arise as expected, can be
substantial.

I am running into this more and more passing through the burn-out
threshold with work.  I am experiencing more these periods of
prolonged shut-down, sometimes days in a row.  A weekend is no longer
enough to recover.  Mostly this happens after something is "done".
When the stress disappears.






Entry: organge site vibrations
Date: Thu Nov  8 17:52:08 EST 2018

https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=18401816



Entry: 8-fold path, 4 paths, 10 fetters
Date: Tue Dec  4 00:17:50 EST 2018

https://deconstructingyourself.com/podcast/dy-010-attention-awareness-and-the-great-adventure-with-guest-culadasa

1:
- knowledge that there is no separate self
- still embedded in it

1->2:
- realization that craving and/or attachment to self is the problem
- this then fuels progress


So what happened?  I got very attached to computer programming.

Podcast doesn't say much about the 8-fold path, but it seems useful to
go over it again.  Eliminating the ones that do not make sense
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Noble_Eightfold_Path


Entry: craving
Date: Tue Dec  4 00:27:30 EST 2018

Something I always misunderstood: craving is desire AND aversion.




Entry: The nessary self in relationships
Date: Sun Dec  9 11:55:53 EST 2018

Put aside the fact that self does appear to be a construct, it is
essential in framing social relations.

Most importantly, there is no way to explain a "predicament" to
somebody without strong embedding in a self-referential story.  I find
in so many situations, the important message to convey is the
difficulty of making a decision given a certain situation.

Basically, sometimes a solid story is really necessary.



Entry: back to dharma
Date: Mon Dec 10 21:52:57 EST 2018

session while driving a little over an hour. focusing on the traffic
instead of breath -- seemed like a good idea :)

difficult at first, but after ten minutes or so it started to become a
little easier.  trying to take the advice that noting can be anything
that was experienced.

noted some new things:

- end of mental "story". ( end of simulation ), and strongly, the
  physical sensation of the emotion it evoked.

- awareness of after-image of sensory field after coming out of mental
  story.  i.e. while story is going on, sensory field still coming in
  but not noticed.  after popping out, last couple of seconds have
  left an imprint.

- noting "i should be noting"

right after driving i walked into a stressful situation.  got
stressed, but kept relatively calm.  no spiralling.


part of "the joke" came back: some situations are just really
impossible to resolve.  and i guess, that's ok.  it is still possible
to be compassionate though.

but it's clear.  this is really necessary..
how to realize that from the other side though.


Entry: Creating the optimal state of mind for Meditation - Culadasa at NYIMC
Date: Wed Dec 12 19:11:08 EST 2018

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Zk2XQFwESIk&t=14s

- focused attention
- peripheral awareness

focusing on an object "gets it out of the way", so you can develop
peripheral awareness.

mindfulness is the optimal interaction between these two.

mindfulness brings:
- response instead of reaction
- taking into account context of a situation
- reaction is loss of context
- everything comes into awareness before it comes into attention
- attention is more self-centered, awareness is other, outside


how to stop mind-wandering:
- it will happen
- when coming back, natural response is anger
- this gets associated with most recent event, which is the comback
- so turn that around: be happy about coming back



Entry: Stuck
Date: Thu Dec 20 12:00:41 EST 2018

Lot's of anxiety and aversion leading to escapism, undermining
practice.  I'm spiraling.

I NEED TO SIT.
RIGHT NOW.



Entry: lean into it
Date: Tue Jan  1 21:33:47 CET 2019

Don't run away, and don't go for full frontal either.  Just lean into
it.  Something will happen.

EDIT: This works.


Entry: Cycling
Date: Fri Jan 18 17:19:25 EST 2019

https://www.dharmaoverground.org/discussion/-/message_boards/message/5839517

https://www.reddit.com/r/streamentry/comments/5u1got/practice_how_is_your_practice_week_of_14_february/

   "Oh, regarding actually making it happen, no need to change your
   practice or technique. Just do what you did to get Stream
   Entry. It's the same process. Getting Second Path is like getting
   First Path again, just less confusing or unclear, and maybe quicker
   to attain."


Entry: Picking up again
Date: Fri Jan 18 17:54:39 EST 2019

So it is very hard to actually sit.  Trying to do the breath
meditation has never really worked, so maybe go back to noting.  That
was quite effective last time.

I do need to find a pre-meditation trick.  Let go of the aversion to
meditation, because without actively doing this, the meditation seems
"fake".  Maybe the noting can pierce through this as well.



Entry: tv is the "out there"
Date: Sat Feb  9 12:20:34 EST 2019

while music playing is the "in here".  Notice the difference when
playing music on youtube and turning off the screen :)

All constructs :)



Entry: How To Cure "Brain Fog" | 3 Tips for Mental Clarity
Date: Sat Feb  9 12:51:04 EST 2019

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D6onQw3hWGg

- overstimulation, attention fragmentation, dopamine fast (no intake,
  only output), meditation

- subconscious disctractions through procrastination.  be on top of
  things.  get things out of the way so they don't create worry.
  write things down and set reminders.

- optimize health: sleep, exercise, hydrate, eat good food



Entry: Observing reality is an act of creation
Date: Fri Mar  8 12:19:50 EST 2019

There is no way around that.
And that may be the essence of humanity.  It is the flower.

So how to relate this to suffering?
Because, rationally, I only see solipsism.



Entry: purpose
Date: Sun Mar 10 13:45:28 EDT 2019

purpose
relevance
meaning
motivation
pointlessness
opportunity
resentment
unfairness
should
task
done
challenge
create
control
connection
automation
world


music


Entry: this context constantly dies
Date: Sun Mar 24 21:59:54 EDT 2019

And we're afraid of dying?



Entry: The power of introverts | Susan Cain
Date: Sun Mar 31 19:07:00 EDT 2019

shyness is fear of social judgement



Entry: Regret
Date: Mon Apr  1 15:41:12 EDT 2019

I am starting to wonder if the unlived life, the potential, has more
value than the lived but imperfect life, because the dream creates
inspiration and motivation to live.  Meaning, it seems better to not
make a choice, than to make a bad one with long lasting consequences,
fueling disappointment and resentment.



Entry: What does the brain want?
Date: Sat Apr  6 08:14:40 EDT 2019

It wants power.

It can't really be forced to do anything.
It can only be tricked into wanting to excert power.

I wonder if much of my low energy, laziness is due to lack of control,
lack of power.




Entry: Stuck in some kind of fantasy
Date: Wed Apr 17 20:07:05 EDT 2019

Anwyays: context is I'm editing my CV for a new round of contract
project hunting, and I can't help but getting sucked into the story of
me.  Explaining myself cause all kinds of cliche suffering.  Highs and
lows.  Both are quite annoying.  Impostor syndrome and big pride of
what I've accomplished.

And it's all just bullshit.  All this value attribution is quite
pointless.

Secondly, the uncertainty of work is making me wobbly.  The need to
get out of hiding.  It's been quite comfortable up to now.




Entry: Math and music
Date: Sat Apr 20 12:04:36 EDT 2019

I think the key insight is to take explicit steps get the ego out of
the way.  Somehow this all got tied with "social capital", and the
"i'm already an expert, this should be easy story", which just
interferes.

The social thing just warps my brain into fear.

Beginner mind mentality acknowledges that all interesting problems are
going to be really difficult because they lack one or more fundamental
insights necessary to make any progress.

Also, it is very hard to intuitively grasp the effect of iteration of
ideas, especially over long time spans.  You tend to forget the places
where you got stuck, but the core remains intact.



Entry: Social
Date: Sun Apr 21 11:49:56 EDT 2019

I guess a lot of the social anxiety comes from the desire to conform
and be accepted.  This shit goes very deep and very far back into
childhood.  The desire to conform conflicts with the intrinsic trait
of not wanting any interference or advice.

People are really built out of contradicting emotions, right?



Entry: Time to reconnect
Date: Sun May 19 20:12:00 EDT 2019

Some things are quite clear:  I live in fear.  And I live in isolation.



Entry: yard work
Date: Sat Jun  8 14:05:18 EDT 2019

Strange. Reading emails I sent earlier today after getting tired doing
yard work outside make them sound really off.  Like a lot of
unnecessary ego and story-driven commentary.




Entry: resilience
Date: Sat Jun  8 15:36:52 EDT 2019

So it is clear: the bouts of anxiety are going to happen.  But fear
doesn't need to be the end point.  It can be a motivator.  It can lead
to routes that up to then where unclear.

https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/basics/resilience

"Resilience is that ineffable quality that allows some people to be
knocked down by life and come back at least as strong as
before. Rather than letting difficulties or failure overcome them and
drain their resolve, they find a way to rise from the
ashes. Psychologists have identified some of the factors that make a
person resilient, among them a positive attitude, optimism, the
ability to regulate emotions, and the ability to see failure as a form
of helpful feedback."



Entry: Replace fear with understanding
Date: Mon Jun 10 17:45:57 EDT 2019

The more I look at this, the more I realize that fear is way to deal
with unknown risk.  Fear can often be removed by clearly assessing
danger, and assessing a procedure to properly handle the danger.

E.g. a power saw is dangerous, but taking into account certain safety
procedures and understanding its operation, the fear can be removed.

So what is danger then?  It is a situation in which careful action is
needed to avoid bad consequences.





Entry: Distraction
Date: Thu Jul 25 21:41:36 EDT 2019

Abt. 3:30

"They just watch me emotionalize, and when I'm done they tell me the
plan is more important."

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Fh8fp9Z78HM



Entry: remnant
Date: Sat Aug 10 19:15:48 EDT 2019

what do we give the remnant?

https://twitter.com/balajis/status/1160421993948147712


Entry: work?
Date: Fri Aug 16 20:10:49 EDT 2019

work is to sacrifice the present for the future
that is the price of consciousness


Entry: procrastination, rebuilding context
Date: Thu Oct  3 13:42:00 CEST 2019

https://lobste.rs/s/f2sdfz/what_is_procrastination_exactly

Has an interesting post.  

https://lobste.rs/s/f2sdfz/what_is_procrastination_exactly#c_wnnwq4

Concentration is actually a relaxed, open mind, not a forced mind.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Conceptual_proliferation

Actionable advice?  Try to find the interesting bit and kick intrinsic
motivation.  Sometimes hard, because a lot of the context can be
tainted already.




Entry: some notes on picking this up again
Date: Sat Nov  2 16:21:14 EDT 2019

For me the problem is always anxiety.  If something doesnt work, it is
always fear and loss of joy that is the problem.  Second level, these
are always tied to some kind of strong clinging that is not seen and
thus cannot be released.

- JUST sit or recline or whatever. just do it

- If it's not possible, focus on the nature of the avalanche of
  sensations instead of getting caught up in them.  The problem tends
  to be that the sheer amount of sensations prevents seeing parts of
  them.  It's ok to see only a couple, but it is important to start
  isolating them and seeing them as just things happening.  Once some
  of them are seen, the avalanche usually starts toning down as things
  that are seen no longer have reinforcing power.

- If that doesn't help, find another trick to kick the anxiety.  JOY
  is an antidote to fear and aniety.  JOY can be hard to recover once
  lost in a state of deep anxiety embedding, but when recovered, it
  does tend to turn you inside-out when making an anxious->joyful
  transition.



The thing about being turned inside out was a very strong experience
during a micromeditation today.  It does seem to have shifted
something.  Anxiety is much diminished.



Entry: something is different
Date: Sat Nov  2 23:10:48 EDT 2019

The anchor point of anxiety is gone.
It's as if I have no interest in getting on the ride.
It has lost its appeal?

It's obvious now I have been wasting my time.  A sentiment that was
there a lot in the past in these moments between things.

And dogs are great.



Entry: are these tics fruitions?
Date: Tue Nov 12 13:35:00 EST 2019

They are getting more frequent, and they are uncomfortable as well.
They seem to be some form of "crash".



Entry: anxiety and the disconnect
Date: Tue Nov 19 09:23:06 EST 2019

The most striking "inside" experience, is the disconnection from joy
and focus.  At times nothing makes sense, and all I see is how things
can go wrong.



Entry: want and waiting
Date: Tue Dec  3 08:28:47 EST 2019

So I get stuck in waiting, wanting things to move forward.  This is
interesting, because it clearly indicates that 2nd path hasn't
happened yet.

Though about 1st path, I am not quite sure.  Been watching some Daniel
Ingram interviews, and one of his criteria is a clear understanding of
the progression of the stages, a lot of cycling, and clear fruitions.
I get "blips", but they do not quite correspond to the description of
reality disappearing and reappearing.  They just feel like jolts, but
are very much triggered by insight-like events.  I.e. they tend to
happen at "detachment points", where I snap out of embedding, see that
things don't make sense, and then somehow "crash".  The reboot is very
subtle.  Not much has changed, but it has the effect of being reminded
of the charade of self.  Of the transient nature of things.

One thing that does seem to be possible these days is to quickly get
into absorption states.  I do not see the 4 stages clearly.  In the
past I thought I did.

So how do I continue from here?  Focusing on second-path style fetters
(aversion, mostly, but more deeply embedded: obsession) seems to make
a lot of sense.  First path fetters (self view) don't really seem so
relevant any more.  Slipping into self-mode is kind of obvious to see
as long as it is not cloaked by aversion, want and obsession.

So I guess the next step is clear: focus on want.





Entry: interaction with the autistic wall
Date: Sat Dec 28 15:02:49 CET 2019

Or whatever to call it.  Some kind of protection mechanism that kicks
in when social interaction is too difficult.  Strong attachment to
being left alone.  Makes it very difficult to let go and actually sit.



Entry: Delivery
Date: Thu Jan  2 19:58:17 CET 2020

Sometimes it really is impossible to decouple delivery and message.

It's all process.  Message arrises during delivery.



Entry: Social
Date: Tue Jan 21 04:51:31 EST 2020

I need to start calling people when I'm away.  Isolation has a
detrimental effect on everyone.  And I need to notice it before it is
too late.




Entry: aversion as a tool
Date: Wed Feb 19 14:35:17 EST 2020

Every day, do something hard, something you don't want to do.

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wKw1tpN7NVE



Entry: worry adds nothing
Date: Tue Mar 10 22:40:38 EDT 2020

Sam Harris

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d0M1ycc_8Hg

42:00 + leadup

if there is something to do, then do it.
if there is nothing to do, then don't worry.

anxiety is always about action.




Entry: Identity as a tool
Date: Sun Mar 22 10:37:36 EDT 2020

I have a hard time listening to _how_ these two speak.  This is _not_
my tribe :)

But it does raise an interesting point: identity as a tool.  If you
know that identity is an illusion but that it is sort of necessary to
have to be able to interface in the world, why not engineer it?

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MSJOtmZHI8I&t=432s




Entry: a cleansing
Date: Mon Mar 23 19:59:08 EDT 2020

Weird day.  Basically, having to submit to not being in control of my
fate, and stop worrying.  I am not currently functional.  Depressed
and difficult to mobilize mental effort.  Started listening to KF's
clicker technique again, and then did some proper meditation.  This
took me off of twitter and mindless fear-browsing Corona.




Entry: cyclothymia
Date: Sat Apr 18 16:16:22 EDT 2020

i'm back.

what did it: lie down with noise cancelling on, and trying to let go
of everything.  the whole thing. the whole idea of life.  then pretty
much die and wake up again.  very refreshed after that.

the little nugget that became very clear once detached is the
stranglehold of fear and anxiety.  it's as if it gets reified: once
detached, the glasses are removed and clear sight is restored.


( i was out of it for a couple of days.  started gradually as really
being bored with work and anything that takes thinking effort, or
effort in general.  then got very amped up listening to a techno set
wednesday afternoon.  this than led to a couple of days of running
away from things, working on my synth stuff and rewiring studio
starting that wednesday night late into the night, to then completely
crash yesterday and today and not be able to do much. )


EDIT: I'm operational again.  Anxiety is a cork.



Entry: Can't die yet
Date: Fri Apr 24 21:33:33 EDT 2020

That is something I felt last week, getting into the music thing.  I
used to experience this more frequently.  In general, I feel quite
indifferent about living or dying.

So I guess that should be worrisome in its own right.  Maybe my normal
already is quite depressed and disappointed?



Entry: Craving people's attention
Date: Fri Apr 24 23:48:57 EDT 2020

Craving social status.

This really is a thing...

I have learned enough to have reached some status in my programming
life.  There at least I think it has some merit.  But as I've noticed
after engaging more on Twitter about more serious programming topics,
attention and rejection really are poison.

So there's that, but I really don't understand what to do with music.

Where it all went wrong is when I tried to seek status making music.
Maybe it is exactly the same with programming, only that for
programming it worked.  For music it pulled me into a world that I
didn't feel at home in.

Music for me is forever tainted to trigger the: "I can do that too and
be cool as well" sentiment.

I've felt exposed ever since I realized this.  I'm ashamed I fell for
it.  I'm ashamed at how deeply rooted this is in human psychology, how
often even in normal conversation I just try to just estabish pecking
order.  And I can completely understand now why other people turn into
assholes when they actually succeed to get attention.

How can music be saved for me?

As with programming, the thing seems to be to find my own style
regardless of what people think of it.  That is in itself a
pretentious thing to do, but it does work to restore some
authenticity.  Focus on beauty, not on performance or acceptance.



Entry: Opening up again
Date: Wed Apr 29 09:02:49 EDT 2020

Wow the lid is coming off...
The feels are there again.



Entry: On wanting attention, now
Date: Wed Apr 29 13:25:52 EDT 2020

It happened again.  I really can't deal well with being ignored.
Makes me quite angry.

So where does that entitlement come from?



Entry: dullness
Date: Mon May  4 16:03:46 EDT 2020

I need a simple way to tackle this.  Something that keeps popping up
is that this is ego stuff.  Self-centered narrative on replay, that
takes up all the space.  Once it is dropped, things start popping up
again.  It's perfectly possible to work with the limitations of not
being fast or not remembering everything.  The impediment is the
aversion to actually do something.  The conflict is between second
order desire to want to want, and first order aversion to not want to
get involved.  This is all fluff.

Just stop resisting


Entry: depressed vs. discontent
Date: Tue Jul 28 16:56:59 EDT 2020

https://open.spotify.com/episode/6sW27VwRqXYC0jaWiC0QMd?si=Y1p3XwwyT0Wn2jLbrEdA-w

depression: no longer anticipate the possibility of feeling happy as a
result of your actions.  no longer anticipate reward.

very different from discontent of situation.

related to relationship to higher meaning - ego is not so interesting.



Entry: conflict
Date: Thu Aug  6 16:49:40 EDT 2020

I have a lesson to learn about conflict.  I don't quite understand yet
what, but it is about mantaining borders, and confronting people that
transgress.

Looks like I am dropped right in the middle of a situation like that.
So what to do?  It is important to stay calm and aware of the central
issue.



Entry: ken mcleod
Date: Thu Aug  6 17:20:37 EDT 2020

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yOp7537lSy4
"we only get angry at what we feel weaker than" 5:50


Entry: some themes
Date: Thu Aug  6 18:24:08 EDT 2020

anger
struggle
desire
aversion



Entry: the actual problem
Date: Thu Aug  6 18:51:37 EDT 2020

1. i get what i want. meaning, i get to learn and use my brain when
i'm awake, and this is very satisfying.

2. this way, i get attached to getting my way.

so what is there to do about that?
can i balance intellectual and spiritual development?
the answer is yes, obviously.
but do i really understand what that means?



Engaging deeply with the programming work requires attachment.
Attachment is a tool.  Put it back in the shed afterwards.

The trick is to turn it on and off.  That is really not
straightforward.  Turning it on requires alertness and relevancy,
turning it off requires some form of insight that can let go in the
presence of strong inertia.  The thing is that it really is a nice
hideout.



Entry: stress
Date: Mon Aug 10 11:49:06 EDT 2020

Why is it so hard to actually sit?  So much mental turmoil that I seem
to not be able to effectively sit for more than 5 minutes.

In previous times, the solution to this was to fist attempt to relax,
and only after reaching some quiet, to try to do noting.

One thing I can see is that I have trained myself in the last couple
of months to get lost in work, which has been relatively successful.
That does not seem to be possible right this moment.


EDIT: Conditional. One stressor removed (difficult work problem) and
it all feels more manageable. The problem is overwhelm. Too many
uncontrollable open problems that have serious consequences, and where
I'm unresolved about how to proceed.



Entry: stop making me feel like
Date: Wed Aug 12 18:18:19 EDT 2020

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LgkBnMu_cdM
17:00

this is actually quite profound, and so easy to forget...

watching the vid took me out of it for a moment. i was quite stuck in
exactly this: causally linking ppl's behavior directly to my sentiment
as if they are responsible for it...


Entry: smile
Date: Sat Aug 15 10:15:29 EDT 2020

I guess that's what I need: some simple advice to get out of the
current rut...

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wEpeaWywKi4

Must admit I find the guy a little annoying and long-winded but hey he
does make a good point:

- stress is about expectations that are too high

- smiling can actually make stress go away in a very direct way.  it
  pulls you into the present.  stress is always about rumination and
  worry about the future.

- relax. it will improve your sleep, and that has a cascade effect.

I'm currently at a point where I am thoroughly trained to initiate the
stress response for just about anything unexpected that happens. It is
getting worse, and some action is needed....



It is really true, isn't it?

STRESS?
LOWER YOUR EXPECTATIONS.

Joy will soon follow.

So much trouble is caused by not acknowledging the cost of wanting a
particular outcome.  If it goes wrong, then what?  The bottom of that
is death.  Usually, it's not going to be death, but something else
that is feared.  Some other kind of loss.  Loss of time.  Money.
Opportunity.  Relationship.




Entry: Practical meditation reminders
Date: Wed Aug 19 13:51:53 EDT 2020

I started formal meditation, mainly triggered by entering a high
stress period, and not being able to maintain proper perspective and
awareness, resulting in physical stress symptoms:

- stomach knot

- prolonged tingly fear/anger body response

The latter is rare but does happen, and has me worried that I might
have let it go unchecked a little too long.  I put focus on the
former, which when overcome, doesn't trigger the second, more intense
feedback loop.


Main coping mechanism has been work: getting into flow tends to make
the symptoms go away.  But it is indirect.  Focusing directly on the
stomach knot is more effective, but harder to do.

REMINDER: It does work.  Just stick to it.

Cushion doesn't seem to be good, so lay down, with blinds and ear
plugs to take out most of the ambient.

The release is quite noticable: intestines start relaxing, and air
starts moving around.  Also a feeling of wellbeing replaces the
clenched fear knot.

I think this is probably good enough as basic practice for now.  Don't
be too ambitious.  At night when it is quiet, the sitting meditation
is more likely to be bearable.

EDIT: Second session, clenched gut again. Very hard to see through
it. Conceptually I know this is the effect of not clearly seeing the
individual parts: the whole solidifies. Thoughts cannot be seen as
thoughts. The feedback cycle is not noticed.

Still attached, but I did notice a slight change when dropping the
identification with the social conflict that is at the root of this
getting stuck.  If mind considers not being part of the construct,
then immediately calm arises.  So maybe to get to see the root here:
where is the identification?

EDIT: Another transition: the realization that the world is large, and
I am limiting myself to a small piece to get stuck in.

shift

prolonged non-dual shift.

happened after sit after hearing daniel describe the "thing the mind
doesn't need to do", around 7:30 in 

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FWUV7hZE0BU

shift reminds me of one of the first one i had, at night sitting in
front of a box fan.  there are fans going now too, and it's dark and
quiet.  similar athmosphere.

the shift is one from "me in the room" to the room filled with sensations.



Entry: continue?
Date: Thu Aug 20 10:03:46 EDT 2020

So yesterday was interesting.  Things are already changing.  However I
do have much stronger anxiety.  I cannot push the fear away, it is
very much in my face demanding to be dealt with.

Dark night resuming..  Impermance.


So a little reminder, again:

1. First objective is to relax.  Breath medatation works, period.
Recline or sit, based on energy level.  It is very clear to see when
relaxation sets in: intenstines start moving air.

2. Second objective is to go head on with the 3 charactersistics.  No
self seems to be the straightforward one, but the one I am stuck on is
impermanence.



Entry: re-insight
Date: Sun Aug 23 10:00:45 EDT 2020

I guess it is now very clear that meditation is something that needs
momentum.  Every day, or it will loose activation.

And it is also clear that even if I can't do the hard core insight
practice per se, just trying to calm the fuck down is already worth
quite a lot.  Instead of focusing on the breath, focus on the knot in
the stomach.  Contraction.



Entry: mindful cleaning
Date: Sun Aug 23 10:16:00 EDT 2020

So why is it so hard to do this?  Cleaning for me is relationship
rumination time.  Mind starts having conversations and simulated
conflicts with people I know.  I don't seem to be get to a sufficient
level of awareness to inctercept and see thoughts as thoughs.

So how to break that down and remove the suffering?

EDIT: One thing that seems to work better than to try to concentrate
on the cleaning itself, is to concentrate on something ambient. I
tried it for a fan, which is monotonous enough so the mind gets
tricked into "this is meditation".  The cleaning is too complex to be
mindful of at this stage, and mind easily wanders elsewhere.



Entry: Last couple of days
Date: Wed Aug 26 17:31:40 EDT 2020

Meditated a lot, with a lot of mind wandering and lack of energy.
Tried to get to a self-drop like happened last Wednesday night, but
the trying probably prevented that from happening.  Yesterday has a
small 1-second shift happen.

Luminosity, field of experience.  It was quite strong, then fear and I
was looking for self/center to come back and it did immediately.

Today restlessness.

Where am I on the map?  I am cycling.  I've had at least two self
drops since I started last week.  One was very clear an profound.  One
was weird and scary.  I find myself stuck mostly in what feels like
reobservation: lot's of restlessness and not-ok-ness with reality.

The transition dark night -> reobservation -> equianimity seems quite
clear.  I keep dropping from equanimity to reobservation due to lack
of concentration.

Read MCTB part about reobservation.  It is explained that strong
concentration can help, and acceptance of this, now.  And indeed, that
works, but I no longer see these strong transitions to equanimity.
Just the feeling of relief, and then slipping right back.

When loosing concentration, I am noticing that there is a drop in
noticable experiences.  Self feels solid.  Story is solid.  When in
concentration there is spaciousness but a strong sense of the watcher.

So what to aim for?

- Be more aware of loss of concentration.  It seems necessary to
  cleanly make the transition from reobservation -> equanimity and
  remain focused, and not just give up because hey I'm good.

- In non-concetrated state, focusing on the sensation of confusion
  seems to help.  This is a hard one to catch because it is very
  sticky.

- The self door is only accessible in equanimity, and concentration
  needs to be really high to allow the transition to centerlesness to
  happen.



Entry: Talking about the moment
Date: Wed Aug 26 20:35:15 EDT 2020

I fell into the trap of solidifying an experience, wanting it to
return, and blabbing about it on email.

Should not.  There is nothing else beyond the moment to point to.  No
amount of conceptualizing is going to make any sense.

Self is such a strong and sticky thing.  Coopting.

How to navigate that?  I want to talk about this, but how?

Just point to the moment?

And it is exactly that which is so utterly uninteresting to the
uninterested.

It is also clear that those that do not already seek are completely
and so incredibly far from being able to hear any of this.

And I count myself there too, for many years on hiatus...

Stuck in that loop, it is real.



Entry: noting
Date: Sat Aug 29 21:31:12 EDT 2020

turns the thinking mind into instead of into your enimy, to something
of a friend that keeps you grounded in experiene.

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eZ_sTcIKJNY



Entry: anxiety attacks
Date: Tue Sep  1 09:57:47 EDT 2020

So it is getting pretty bad.
Woke up just before 4am this morning all panicky.
Meditated.
Calm came back, perspective came back.
Was able to sleep until past 9am.
Had some really weird out-of-place positive vibe dreams.



Entry: anxiety again
Date: Wed Sep  2 21:55:45 EDT 2020

It is getting worse.
The only thing that works is concentration-style practice.

Don't keep trying to do vipassana in this state if it doesn't work.
It is too hard, and failing doesn't really seem to bring much skill,
just seems to reinforce embedding.

Try concentration first to calm down.  It is almost always effective.
Just have to remember what path to take to first break out of the
panic cycle!



Entry: anxiety
Date: Sat Sep 12 13:36:01 EDT 2020

More anxiety around this move and house sale stuff.  We're dealing
with things one at a time.  She had a good point that these are all
problems of abundance...

Anyways I am able to move past them by doing concentration style
meditation.  Can't do that in my sleep, so I still wake up anxious.



Entry: Balls of dukka
Date: Sat Sep 12 13:38:14 EDT 2020

So I have this visualizing exprience: when stuck in some loop and the
body / mind sensations can be isolated, there is a point where a
"ball" sensation dissipates into something in what feels like a sort
of explosion or bursting open.

I've had some similar experience at a whole body level where it felt
like being turned inside out.

With these "dukka balls" it feels like the transition between solid
and "wind" is somehow apparent.  It feels quite intense if the
original unpleasant sensation is intens.  During this transition there
is a strong sense of loosing control, of letting go of the railing.

Hard to describe, but the phenomenon has happened multiple times.



Entry: qualiacomputing
Date: Sun Sep 13 08:52:10 EDT 2020

From interview with Ingram:

https://qualiacomputing.com/




Entry: the big 6
Date: Wed Sep 16 13:35:47 EDT 2020

anger
fear
sadness
embarrassment
impatience
disgust

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lD1ny_Q8sKo



Entry: intestines
Date: Thu Sep 17 08:55:58 EDT 2020

One remarkable phenomenon: stress clearly blocks processing in
intestines.  Almost every time, when I attempt to relax, I feel and
hear things start to move again.


Entry: getting clogged
Date: Mon Sep 21 19:19:24 EDT 2020

What actually makes me tired and uncomfortable is the contraction, the
resistance against either doing or not being able to do.

There is this moment in the day when I can't push any longer.  That is
the moment to let go and relax, and then after resting to resume at
what comes naturally.  This whole thing tends to get really clogged...



Entry: a goal
Date: Mon Oct  5 13:06:55 EDT 2020

I want to break the cycle.  Don't get excited any more.  Because this
shit is not working any longer.  I guess I have to be the sane one.




Entry: embedded
Date: Tue Nov  3 11:53:35 EST 2020

So drama level has dropped a bit, and now I feel mostly boredom.  What
is left to do is work.  Work that requires a lot of effort without
bringing any satisfaction.  Depressing work...

There are two paths from here: procrastination, to try to find
something interesting to lift the spirit, or just plowing through the
boredom.

Akrasia...

Focus is difficult. Aversion is strong. Desire for a "mental gift" is
strong, i.e. the desire to discover something and to go into a flow
state where curiosity creates the activation.

Embedding is strong, which makes me give up when things are not
self-propelling.  I really can't be bothered.  I really don't care.
It is all too indirect, without reward or without meaning.  How to
actually turn it around?  How to work without reward, or is it better
to somehow trick that reward?


Entry: stuck
Date: Tue Nov  3 13:32:12 EST 2020

So I'm really stuck.  I don't see a way out.  Attachment to not taking
action, or aversion to taking action is very high.  Leave me alone.
That kind of thing.

 

Entry: attached to being interested
Date: Mon Nov 16 21:45:13 EST 2020

What does it actually mean to be disinterested.  Interest/disinterest
must be attraction/repulsion, desire/aversion.

It seems to really boil down to desire for curiosity, because
curiousity is such a pleasant mental state.



Entry: praise and blame and burnout
Date: Sun Jan 24 12:02:43 EST 2021

So I'm having issues with work.  Pushing too hard because I really do
not want to say no in times where I am a blocking component.

What to do about this?



Entry: social anxiety
Date: Mon Mar  1 08:22:06 EST 2021

The trick is to reframe it as desire: a desire to conform to a certain
behavioral pattern to gain acceptance, be judged positively by others.
It is a desire to control the thoughts of others that is fueled by a
clinging to the contents of those thoughts, just as absurd as the
desire to cling to trying to control the contents of own thoughts.

I find it very hard to see through this in the moment.


Entry: Psychologizing "task tension"
Date: Tue Mar  2 11:40:55 EST 2021

Basically, I have no issues with procastinating when the failure to
act has consequences that only reflect onto myself, i.e. pay a fine.

However, when failure has the consequence of damaging social standing,
I am a _lot_ more careful.  I've been trying to disentangle this one
for a while, but I think I figured it out:  the central idea is power.

Power is about one person yielding to the wishes of another.  The only
way that it ever makes sense is when the yielding person has a reason
to make themselves subordinate.  Putting it in the first person: if
the other person has something you want (which could be something like
money, but could also be "social credits", or even the ability to
destroy something you already have, i.e. your life or your
reputation).

Transferring power is a transaction.  What I am not always aware of,
is why I yield in situations where I am not aware of the price.  And
when I am not aware, that price is repuation.  Or at least, there is
the fear for me to loose social credits that is not acknowledged.


Aside, this fear of rejection seems to be deeply built in.  Probably
evolutionary, from the time where rejection meant exile and probably
death.



Entry: The thread
Date: Sat Mar 27 10:20:07 EDT 2021

I wonder how much of my suffering is really rooted in the difficulty
to switch the train of thought.  I.e. I have a very hard time
"listening".  Somehow most is dismissed as irrelevant.  Does not
apply.

I noticed this strongly by listening to one of Michael Taft's guided
meditation sessions.  He talks a lot.  Doesn't really leave much time
to swich from listening/interpreting mode to focus on experience.

Something to investigate.  It appears to be very difficult to let go
of "defences" when listening.  I think I fundamentally perceive
someone talking to me as a threat -- it puts me in a very cautious
state of mind.  Opposite of hypnotizable?

Maybe it would help to focus on that aversion and attempt to actively
let it go?



Entry: Aversion
Date: Sat Mar 27 11:06:53 EDT 2021

Aversion is just desire for the negation of a condition.

I find it straightforward to let go of "acquisitions", but the reverse
is much more difficult: can't let go of the desire not to be
stimulated by, reminded of a certain thing.

Now this almost always translates to situations of power: where I need
to perform some action because of requirements set by other people.
With a strong "or else" component.  Which is what power is: the
ability to perform retaliation, piggy-backing on a strong aversion for
that.

This always happens at tax time...

https://www.reddit.com/r/TheMindIlluminated/comments/83167n/my_mind_gets_fully_absorbed_by_anger_or_aversion/



Entry: Stuck, coping
Date: Mon Apr  5 11:40:29 EDT 2021

I got stuck.  Weekend was ok, I managed to get the paperwork mostly
done.  This morning I had to do something difficult and eventually got
completely stuck in aversion, being forced to do this by external
forces.

Same story, again.

Aversion against coercion.

EDIT: Just being able to "reset" the context makes me feel a lot
better.  I could only do it by removing the stressor, giving myself
permission to take a break.  It is such an old thing: having to do
something that requires a lot of effort and in itself seems pointless.
I.e. hoop jumping for some kind of regulation requirement...

EDIT: The reset is necessary. Getting pulled out of the context. Of
course it was yet again another Ingram video that did this. Ingram is
somehow associated with "stop whining and sit".  In this case, lay
down, relax, and let go.  Look wat what is roaming around.  Look at
it!

Sometimes saying that yes I do need a break is necessary.



Entry: Aware of tension
Date: Sat Apr 10 06:52:15 EDT 2021

It's been a really stressful time.  I've gotten in the habit if worry
and "urgency".

Started doing some more formal meditation, and immediately the
physical manifestation of this is more clear: the awareness of holding
tension in abdominal muscles, and how that awareness leads to release
that is followed by bowel noises.




Entry: In the seeing only the seen
Date: Tue Apr 20 18:50:04 EDT 2021

https://www.dharmaoverground.org/discussion/-/message_boards/message/3495392


Entry: Things are picking up again
Date: Thu Apr 22 07:24:14 EDT 2021

Currently not doing formal sitting, only reclining and "mindfulness
throughout the day".

Current stuck points:

- Able to trigger microdrops by focusing on awareness, but self-pull
  seems so strong to immediately reestablish itself.



Entry: review
Date: Thu Apr 22 20:04:38 EDT 2021

https://www.reddit.com/r/TheMindIlluminated/comments/7y84ys/behavior_change_with_the_mindful_review/

    This cannot be overstated.

    The single most destructive thought at any given moment:

    "Perhaps I should be somewhere else, doing something else, or with someone else"

    Break this pattern and watch life emerge anew.



Entry: I need a plan
Date: Fri Apr 23 19:14:59 EDT 2021

So what actually happened?

I started doing some jhana practice mostly as a medicine to chronic stress.

This shifted things, revived interest in the dharma, and opened up
things to be able to do vipassana throughout the day.

The physical component of the stress (butterflies in the belly) is
still there for most of the day unless I'm in active flow doing
meditation or work.  It is however not as problematic.

Yesterday I started more direct observation of "selfing".  After not
being able to make the butterflies go away with vipassana style
meditation, I started looking for self, and did find some effect on
the butterflies.  They go away, then come back again.

I'm going with the assumption that there is some thought process in
the background that is creating the feedback loop that keeps the
butterflies alive, but I'm not able to see it.




Entry: Plan and stuckness
Date: Sat Apr 24 17:29:10 EDT 2021

1. In a dull and tired state or otherwise embedded state, it can be
difficult to get to the level of awareness to actually let go of the
attachment that is causing the feedback loop of the moment.  This is
probably the most important challenge at this point.

Don't do noting practice in this state.

Identify the desire to be somewhere else, and let it go.


2. Once transitioned, do noting practice.



Entry: First sit
Date: Sun Apr 25 19:21:13 EDT 2021

Did my first formal 30 min sit since a looong time.
And I'm reminded this is necessary.
Reclining is not enough, especially not if the energy is not there.
And mindfulness throughout the day is not enough without the sits.

Blips are back.  Some of them really feel like short circuits.

They still happen together with muscle contractions and cavitation in
my neck.

Recognized: deep welling bliss, passing through a&p?
No real negative other than a point of wanting to be elsewhere.

Even recursively: noting wanting to be elsewhere in itself turned into
wanting to be elsewhere.

The loopy shit is back!

Letting go of the desire for experiencing a no-self episode lead to a
blip, but I did not experience a self drop.  Only very faint in the
background.

Equianimous moments, but not deeply so and not stable.

Still wandering thoughts.  Chains were short enough so I could trace
them to the sensory event.



Entry: trouble
Date: Tue Apr 27 09:16:30 EDT 2021

And immediately, trouble strarts... Clear view of unsatisfactoriness.
Also "interceptions", i.e. mind wandering, actually up from meditation
cushion.  Feelings of "shit i got on the train again"...

Or it could just be world stress again.  Meditation temporarily
shifting perspective, but then world stress snapping back with a
vengeance.



Entry: formations
Date: Tue Apr 27 15:41:34 EDT 2021

This is the first time I've seen this explained, making sense:

    Have you ever had one of those experiences when you saw something
    -- whether a photograph or an assemblage of things or a close-up
    of a particular body part from an unusual angle or whatever --
    that your mind wasn't able to immediately recognize? And then as
    you looked more closely at whatever it was, you suddenly figured
    out what it was? Something "clicked" and you got it? That clicking
    is an experience of a formation arising. The mind shifts from
    experiencing unconceptualized sensory information flows to
    experiencing the concept.

    As I practice seeing one formation arise and then the next and
    then the next, with time and patience it becomes possible to
    perceive the mind doing each formation's "click," which is a kind
    of clinging, a kind of attempt to lock in on some aspect of the
    constantly changing flow. Once its seen as a kind of clinging, it
    can be released. (It can also be interesting to discern the
    mind-patterned karma that leads the mind to create a particular
    formation out of a data set that might yield a different formation
    to a differently-configured mind.)

https://www.dharmaoverground.org/discussion/-/message_boards/message/1617830
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sa%E1%B9%85kh%C4%81ra


Entry: diagnosis
Date: Tue Apr 27 18:41:39 EDT 2021

Let's look at it again.  With some practice inertia I can reach
equanimity and arrive at non-dual experience.  But it is not stable.
Self suddenly drops away with a strong release of all tension, and
gradually reappears over a couple of seconds after a "wow there it is"
thought sets self in motion again.

There does seem to be a difference between that and stream entry,
where after the latter the entry to that state becomes effortless.

But then there is a different practice that tries to directly evoke
this, then gradually stabilize it.

Jason Snyder:
https://www.dharmaoverground.org/discussion/-/message_boards/message/5845469


Terminology:
- non-dual glimpses
- no cessations

Some more, about non-dual states being a trap:
https://www.dharmaoverground.org/discussion/-/message_boards/message/22289667

No fans of Advaita!

Basic vibe I get from those posts is that it is important to
distinguish temporary states and permanent shifts.  Temporary states
are easy to solidify which is the opposite of what is necessary.

The other thing is that nondual states without the element of
compassion are definitely not it.



Entry: current practice
Date: Wed Apr 28 21:05:49 EDT 2021

Doing what feels appropriate.

- Keep trying to recreate the non-dual experience by going out of
  focus, bringing out the periphery.  The feeling itself is getting
  more clear, and it is not sudden.  I can see elements of it, so it
  does look like a construct.

- During daily life, noticing stress pop up.  This often happens at
  strange times.  Assuming this is egoic contraction, then to look for
  that and find it on its way out.  Often leading to embarrasment.  I
  think after talking about this more recently, I started solidifying
  the idea of attainment.

Back on track now?  Or am I solidifying back-on-trackness?

This is so fucking circular.


Entry: I AM
Date: Thu Apr 29 16:06:42 EDT 2021

https://www.dharmaoverground.org/discussion/-/message_boards/message/22292032

The I AM stage comprises the exploration / development of :

(1) impersonality ("no sense of a personal doer... I and everything is
being lived by a higher power, being expressed by a higher cosmic
intelligence").

(2) the intensity of luminosity ("experience as much vividness as
possible and have clarity on the luminous aspect of awareness
first. Touch, taste, smell and sound are all equally vivid as
compared to seeing. Experience the texture and fabric of awareness")

(3) dissolving the need to abide in I AMness ("abiding in Presence
... may result in the oceanic experience ... (but) it is a pitfall
that prevents effortless and non-dual experience of Presence (this
requires deeper insights) and is a form of efforting") ,

(4) experiencing effortlessness ("any form of clinging, be it
Self/self or Presence, will prevent a practitioner from correctly
experiencing effortlessness")

Those aspects look similar to what 3rd Pathers describe here in
DhO. What Soh Wei Yu says is that once you deepen in those four areas,
then you can make fast progress into Anatta through two practices:
 
(1) "contemplating 'where does awareness end and manifestation begin'
or 'is there a border/dividing line between awareness and
manifestation' until Witness/phenomena collapses into a borderless one
mind, one field of awareness where mind and manifestation can no
longer be distinguished. This is *NOT* anatta".

(2) "contemplating Bahiya Sutta (in seeing only the seen, on hearing
only the heard, etc) until it is suddenly realized that the whole
structure of Seer-Seeing-Seen doesn't apply and there is no seeing
besides colors -- no seer, no hearing besides sound -- no hearer, no
awareness besides manifestation. This is not just realising the lack
of borders or duality but realizing the Absence of an inherently
existing Self/Agent/Awareness behind manifestation. This is the
realization of anatta".



Entry: obtaining affirmation
Date: Thu Apr 29 16:21:30 EDT 2021

( Psychologizing... )

Higher level of awareness is starting to expose embarrasing things
again.

Through more subtle awareness of stress I've identified something that
was in plain sight: a _very_ strong attachment to / expectation of a
particular kind of social feedback in response to making jokes or
not so serious comments online.

It's different from in-person, where it feels more natural is is maybe
a bit more subtle, and where it is easier to get a laugh, but for some
reason, online interactions really amplify the expectation of a good
response because there is this filter of body language and harder to
grant someone a subtle acknowledgement.

This is so much part of building social cohesion.

And the irony is that it is completely a-symmetric: probably other
people experience similar sentiments, but I do not honor this for
others!



Entry: Selving
Date: Fri Apr 30 20:08:48 EDT 2021

So it's clearly the identification. The process. The selfing. Every
facet seen clearly can cause a release. That is peeling the onion.


Entry: so, what haven't you lost?
Date: Sat May  1 22:20:21 EDT 2021

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q-XGCP4r6Vc



Entry: how do i unenlighten myself?
Date: Mon May 10 21:38:19 EDT 2021

21:00
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zXl-BMUotwo

once you see how it's doing it, then when it's doing it you're not
believing it


Entry: very contracted
Date: Tue May 11 05:37:51 EDT 2021

Something unexpected happened, not even that big, and I got bent out
of shape in a disproportionate way, even didn't sleep right.  Tried to
sit with it yesterday, and couldn't do vipassana on the sensations
that were associated with it.  To strong, they just dragged me along.
Tried to catch the arising of self, couldnt.  So went back to focusing
on the moment, physical sensations, and that calmed me down a bit.
General feeling is that of WTF why doesn't this work any more.

Map wise, this sounds like 3 characteristics or reobservation.  I also
have pain in my back (3c) but that might just be because I've been
hauling shit and sleeping in a bed that isn't great...


Entry: compassion
Date: Tue May 11 06:28:15 EDT 2021

everything points in that direction: i am stuck in contraction due to
lack of compassion, towards others and towards my own lack of control.
gladdening the mind works wonders, but is difficult to remember to do
when in the dry vipassana groove.


Entry: morality
Date: Tue May 11 06:43:18 EDT 2021

if there are unresolved things, resolve them first.

sitting with the anguish of social friction in the background just
makes things a lot more difficult.  resolve through skillful
interaction, or get to a place of acceptance if that is not possible.



Entry: today
Date: Tue May 11 20:01:52 EDT 2021

i got to spiralling.

misery
fear

strong contraction for other people's suffering


Entry: depression shift
Date: Wed May 12 21:59:58 EDT 2021

I saw a depression state shift today by simply looking at the moment
and realzing "i can just stop doing this".

In that state it was clear that the depressed state was created by
holding on to something.  Hard to say exactly what, but it is as if
the misery creates some kind of solidity that is an anchor point, but
the underlying sensations can also be let to die.  It does require for
them to be seen directly.  The clenching needs to be seen.  Not just
the misery.  Not straightforward when you are deeply embedded, or
created by it?



Entry: Zen, just sitting
Date: Fri May 14 23:23:39 EDT 2021

https://www.dharmaoverground.org/discussion/-/message_boards/message/5765643

Basic idea: things come about out of the blue in a state of focus.
The Math example is interesting.

    So-called stream entry is like any other concentration study where
    an insight into the study comes out of the blue, but through a
    focused attention. So one can be sewing or doing some math, for
    example, and be stuck on a problem, sitting there while after
    while after while focused on the situation at hand. Then, out of
    the blue, some insight sparks about the issue.


Entry: What needs doing
Date: Sun May 16 10:21:43 EDT 2021

General life stuff, things that have become clear over time.

1. It is important to get out of a situation of indentured servitude
as soon as possible. And of course I mean the generalization of that:
I'm comfortable, and I'm just whining.  But still, getting in a
situation where there is an idea that you "can't leave" is no good.
Always make sure that you can walk away when things do not work out.
Getting trapped is a horrible situation and leads to really bad
decisions that make things worse.

2. Many of such prisons are mental fabrications, and being in the
midst of it, is is not always clear how the power structure came into
being.  It can be as simple as a misaligned notion of what is right.

3. While fatigue and overwhelm are real, meaning today might just not
be the day, aversion and laziness are just immature. And it is
important to see the difference.



Entry: Anger and helplessness
Date: Mon May 17 12:04:29 EDT 2021

Today, going through an episode of anger and helplessness, I went the
route of remembering, looking at the sensations, looking at how they
create I, and the whole thing just dropped.

Not a drop of self, but a drop of the entire mental tower of anger,
helplessness, blame and resentment.  Space opened up and I was able to
just resume work, which I wasn't able to do before this whole thing
took off.

Looks like some progress is happening.

Also, trying to "not struggle" with work.  Just sit there, focus on
the problem, don't try to "force" a solution, don't try to actively
steer the thinking process (which really doesn't seem to be possible
anyway).  And kaboom, simple solution arises after a while.


EDIT: This felt like something new.  I can't stop smiling and finding
the whole thing hilarious.

EDIT: Lasted for about an hour, then contraction set in again on the
walk when the dog was being an ass, and the whole constant good/bad
thing started again.  Before there was just a clear, wide open
emotional space.



Entry: What do I want out of this?
Date: Fri May 21 07:10:14 EDT 2021

Following Adya's advice: clearly articulate what you want.

Going back to the basics, I want to mange anxiety, so I can be a
functional human being.  The problem is mostly emotional responses
that are a consequence of not being able to live up to expectation.
Whatever personal or work situation, but that is pretty much it.  I
can't cope with stress.

Now secondary is of course enlightenment.  What is become clear in all
this, is that the problem is the fundamental grasping, and working
towards reducing the fundamental grasping has one endpoint: it's
absence.





Entry: work
Date: Tue May 25 11:39:49 EDT 2021

Have to be more mindful about how work is wearing me down.

I've been having these glympses of how I remember things used to be:
lot's of hope and appetite for learning, but now I often feel like
"shit, this again... i'm tired".



Entry: fear
Date: Tue Jun  1 09:11:20 EDT 2021

Lot's of old stuff coming up.  Basic thing is though: stick true to
word, realize that freedom is the default state: power is always given
away in return for something else, and be compassionate.



Entry: confusion is also a sensation
Date: Wed Jun  9 09:45:00 EDT 2021

This is something that has thrown me for a loop many times.  Getting
into a state where mind does not know how to make sense of things and
does not know what to do.

That is actually an ideal moment to just drop the whole knot and go
back to raw sensate.  At that point the tension is clearly purely
mental, and dropping it instantly creates relief.

But it seems to be necessary to first have the realization that it is
actually possible to just drop, because what the mind wants to do is
absolutely not drop this current important problem!


Entry: Qualia
Date: Wed Jun  9 10:03:08 EDT 2021

Daniel Ingram mentioned:
https://qualiacomputing.com/
Andrs Gmez Emilsson

He is part of:
https://www.qualiaresearchinstitute.org/

Together with:
Michael (Mike) Edward Johnson
https://opentheory.net/

And a host of other people.

Further reading:

https://qualiacomputing.com/archives/

Robin Carhart-Harriss work on entropic disintegration in the brain.
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fnhum.2014.00020/full

The Free Energy Principle comes from Karl Friston:
https://www.wired.com/story/karl-friston-free-energy-principle-artificial-intelligence/
( Basically, "surprise minimisation" )



log:
https://qualiacomputing.com/2019/11/29/neural-annealing-toward-a-neural-theory-of-everything/
https://opentheory.net/2019/11/neural-annealing-toward-a-neural-theory-of-everything/



Entry: Tranquil Wisdom Insight Meditation (TWIM) - Bhante Vimalaramsi
Date: Fri Jun 11 09:56:51 EDT 2021

https://www.dhammatalks.org/Archive/Writings/CrossIndexed/Uncollected/MiscEssays/metta_means_goodwill.pdf
https://library.dhammasukha.org/uploads/1/2/8/6/12865490/a_guide_to_forgiveness_meditation.pdf
http://library.dhammasukha.org/uploads/1/2/8/6/12865490/a_guide_to_twim.pdf
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bhante_Vimalaramsi



Entry: Rat in a cage.
Date: Sat Jun 12 07:20:25 EDT 2021

Problem?  I am stuck in a small space with a bunch of anxious people,
with lots of distraction, and it is making me nervous.  It triggered
the "i give up" response.  Not in the letting go sense, but in the "it
is all going to shit" sense.

I need a reliable way to get out of this.  The overall sentiment is
that of being trapped.  Not being able to escape the constant stimulus
that I do not handle very well.  It gets to a point where I loose all
joy.

What helped in the past?
- rigorous meditation
- reconnect with joy

Causal chains:
joy -> open mind -> intrinsic interest
meditation -> re-establishing of insight -> release

A clear symptom is the lack of focus and looking for "entertainment"
but not finding it because there is no appreciation for anything.


Entry: I need to log this..
Date: Sun Jun 13 11:25:40 EDT 2021

A recipe:

Tried to sit outside but could not get rid of the unease of not
feeling safe from interruption.  ( I think that is a big one to work
on in the future - always beying on guarde. )

Rubbed one out in the bathroom when there was a moment to do so.

Went into the room, put earplugs in, sat quietly.

Then it shifted, joy came back (thinking about Run DMC lyrics).

So the point here is to really get rid of the tension first.  There is
no point in attempting to do vipassana or just sitting with tension
not explicitly addressed.  Here there were two clear elements: not
feeling safe (not being able to turn of the "social lobe"), and sexual
frustration.

I feel calm now, ready to take things on.

But the real lesson is that I do need that solitude.  Can't seem to
make it work without it in the current mental configuration.


Entry: Solitude
Date: Sun Jun 13 11:37:08 EDT 2021

Some elements:

- a strong need to not be caught up in other people's drama, even just
  their day to day "doings", without much emotional tension apart from
  want / not want.  just dealing with someone else's "thread" can be
  too much if there is no release.

- the need to get into brittle mind states that are easily disrupted.
  i've found that just someone asking me a question or just being near
  me is enough to get distracted.

- the need to drop social persona.  there's just no way around the
  need to play a role, behave according to expectation. it is
  exhausting.



Entry: Social anxiety
Date: Sun Jun 13 11:52:01 EDT 2021

It would be so great if I could overcome that feeling of unease just
being outside...



Entry: Handbook for the Recently Enlightened
Date: Thu Jul  1 06:46:53 EDT 2021

by Duncan Barford.

Not easy to read. Especially the part about the absolute is
impenetrable without the experience I guess, but some interesting
points:

- Duality (p8) is such a stupid way of seeing the world, that it's its
  own best argument against itself.

- Fidgeting (p22) is the sound of failure.  The sigh is the token of
  stealing the self, in itself another form of indulging the ego.

- Include, p22 onwards.  The way in which self manifests is to
  partition off certain sensations.  Including _everything_ into
  direct observation is the way to go.  Anything that splits off and
  excepts itself from observation is a hindrance.  This is especially
  true of any resistance to the process of insight meditation.

- Brow Chakra p77 seems particularly closely related to meditation.
  He takes the point that the sensation of the Chakra opening _is_ the
  insight p79.

- Planes of existence p88 is an interesting take on the physical,
  etheral and astral

- There is no compassion without getting into the shit.


https://www.amazon.com/Handbook-Recently-Enlightened-Enlightenment-Attain/dp/0956332137

https://www.dharmaoverground.org/discussion/-/message_boards/message/3763729


Entry: strong aversion
Date: Thu Jul  1 08:44:32 EDT 2021

Got woken up very early which put me in a horrible mood.  Tried to
think my way out of it, basically finding something I could do with
reduced capacity.  Finally layed down to meditate.  Did that for 1.5h
or so.  Dozed off a couple of times, but was able to get centered
again.

It took a while though.  The embedding was very strong.

Maybe I do this more in the morning?  If I find lack of focus, just
meditate.  Focus is not really necessary.  What is necessary is only
the intention to focus and to bring everything into awareness.




Entry: Lead by example
Date: Thu Jul  1 16:31:49 EDT 2021

I resolve to no longer give advice unless I practice what I preach.



Entry: Resume
Date: Thu Jul  1 17:40:40 EDT 2021

So what are the important recent lessons?

- Include everything.

- Try to stay in samadhi when doing menial tasks.



Entry: Catch those mornings...
Date: Fri Jul  2 06:43:18 EDT 2021

Not easy, but definitely better this morning than other mornings.
Just being mindful of what is actually happening, i.e. how mind
attaches to things on waking up, is already a good step.


Entry: Near enemies
Date: Mon Jul  5 16:12:16 EDT 2021

There is a big difference between:

- Joy, compassion that comes from sadness, suffering

- The detached state of bodily bliss, hiding from suffering

I've been experiencing both lately.  The latter one was strange
because it happened when I was talking to my mother and had a hard
time tuning into her emotionally.

The former just happened, thinking about a dog that recently died, and
how dogs are great.  It opened up my heart and out poured all this
joy, a stark contrast to the ego-filled "quirky fun" that tends to pop
up.




Entry: Annealing
Date: Wed Jul  7 10:33:39 EDT 2021

Stayed up very late watching stupid youtube videos.  I guess it is an
alternative to getting drunk...



Entry: Self as a navigation system
Date: Wed Jul  7 12:38:53 EDT 2021

Navitation seems necessarily self-centered: I am here, and I want to
go there. State -> Goal. (1)

All complex problem-solving though seems to have that nature if the
navigation is high-level, e.g. language-like, story-like.

If the navigation is abstract it can be automated more, solved in a
parallel way.  Thinking fast instead of thinking slow.

So is self necessarily linked to thinking slow in the Kahneman sense?


(1) I noticed this morning, that doing the dished can be done in a
concentrated/absorbed state, but putting dishes away when it is not
clear where they should go is not possible.  Self seems to be needed.



Entry: joy and compassion are linked
Date: Wed Jul  7 15:05:28 EDT 2021

Both are open states.  Entering one immediately creates a bridge to
the other.

What I miss is not so much concentration or awareness, but mostly the
bridge to joy and compassion.


EDIT: This is actually quite obvious when you think about it.  Joy and
compassion are the same thing, with just different valence (happy /
sad).


Entry: My mental problems are social problems
Date: Fri Jul  9 10:21:17 EDT 2021

They are all in some sense about not living up to an ideal, either in
the eyes of others, or in my own mind.

The self-judgement is maybe best understood as another social problem?
The need to be able to manipulate judgment?



Entry: aversion
Date: Fri Jul  9 12:30:24 EDT 2021

It is very strong.
To the point that I'm suffering trying to get rid of it.
Weird convoluted state...

EDIT: So if vipassana does't work (failure to get out of the
embedding, into observation), do some concentration practice first to
calm down.  I needed less than 5 minitues to get out of the freak-out.





Entry: Mistranslating the Buddha
Date: Sun Jul 11 00:19:31 EDT 2021

https://docs.google.com/document/d/10qEXvtCJbukUZ-qQDCK2XwRUD8xp2kl-Ok7d7vUR1yM/edit#
http://neuroticgradientdescent.blogspot.com/2020/01/mistranslating-buddha.html

This merits a summary

Tanha is the cause of Dukkha. Understanding Anicca and Anatta inclines
the mind toward Nibbana by removing the Upadana that maintains the
creation of Sankharas.

Important: noun/verb duality in Pali: these describe states but also
the futily of the 3 maladaptive strategies:

Anicca <-> Nicca: assuming permanence, ability to maintain things
Anatta <-> Natta: assuming having control, ownership
Dukkha <-> Sukha: assuming possibility of fulfillment

Tanha: clenching, grasping, attaching to.

Nibbana: relaxing, non-efforting (in contrast to 3 effortful
strategies).

Upadana: mixing of valance (desirable, undesirable) with created
perceptive objects, opposite of equanimity.

Sankharas (formations), conglomerates of sensory images and attached
processing.




Entry: Today went well
Date: Sun Jul 11 21:55:28 EDT 2021

Late afternoon I had a reclining meditation and a sit that touched on
the "pure awareness" state I recognize, but it did not "flip" as it
dit before.  Meditation was blurry in the beginning but I found myself
in a state of clarity and calm and practiced focusing on:
- subtle stress
- identifying "selfing"
- "include", trying to contain the whole picture

Now and earlier feeling quite blissed out. High.


So I've had two similar episodes this week, about 5-6 days apart with
strong suffering in the middle.  If this isn't cycling I don't know.
In the equanimity peaks, meditation just goes by itself.  In the shit
inbetween I don't know which is up or which is down.


Entry: equanimity
Date: Tue Jul 13 00:44:18 EDT 2021

Since yesterday (I think?) I feel different.  I noticed it especially
in the ride to the airport.  No stress.  Which was strange.

Also no reactivity.  Even with wife going a bit on a rant :)




Entry: Equanimity
Date: Tue Jul 13 11:28:14 EDT 2021

een van die links via whatsapp bevat ook een video:
http://neuroticgradientdescent.blogspot.com/2020/06/first-five-years-of-practice-interview.html

de indruk dat ik had van die mens is "wat een ego
tripper". waarschijnlijk omdat ik mezelf daar in herken :)

soit een van de dingen die hij zei was de realisatie "hey, i am doing
this" als er een reactie opkomt, en daarna de realisatie dat dat
volledig overbodig is, waarna de reactie stopt. dat was een subtiel
ander perspectief dat een indruk maakte en dat is nu wat ik ook ervaar
met habituele aversie. kleine dingen zoals frustratie in verkeer,
frustratie in falende computersystemen, frustratie in opmerkingen van
levenspartner :)

in de toestand waar ik me nu in bevind voel ik die frustratie opkomen
met daarna de realisatie "ja, geen goesting in drukmakerij, next".

nu ben ik curieus naar de overgang, zien of er inderdaad wijsheid is
om de nodige unclenching te doen om er terug uit te geraken. die dark
night toestanden lijken toch echt wel gecentreerd rond het loslaten
van dingen die ge absoluut niet wilt loslaten.




Entry: Cycle again
Date: Wed Jul 14 11:32:02 EDT 2021

Very different this morning.  Aversion against putting in mental
effort for work, gradually ramping up to agitation and reactivity.
Also fear is back.

So at this point, if I've gotten any wiser, the thing is to keep
meditating.  See if that moves things back into equanimity.  Also
important: let go of the illusion of control, i.e. one of the objects
of frustration is the lack of control over that cycle.

EDIT: Removing the stressors (pause work, alone in the house), I feel
better.  So it has to do with dealing with external stimulus.  The
switch from equanimity to whatever this is now is not being able to
properly manage those stimuli.

EDIT: Removed another stressor (work problem solved) and positive
affect returned.  So it seems mostly that conditionality returns.




Entry: Work aversion
Date: Fri Jul 16 14:09:31 EDT 2021

It would be nice to find a way to use this as meditation material.
Aversion is strong right now.  No intrinsic motivation.
Very much looking for a way out, something "urgent" to do instead.
Really do not want to think...

EDIT: Not only work aversion.  It is aversion in general.  Very strong
discontentment with a choice I need to make between two things I
really don't want, because of a third thing I really disagree with.  A
network of disagreements...

EDIT: I went on to read MCTB2 dark night descriptions, disgust
https://www.mctb.org/mctb2/table-of-contents/part-iv-insight/30-the-progress-of-insight/8-disgust/

Wrote in another report that concentration practice temporarily
removes the emotional component, but then immediately returns upon
letting the mind free again.  From this it does make sense that wet
insight doesn't have dark night symptoms, e.g. according to Culadasa.

Another thing is that if meditation immediately influences the
symptoms, the whole thing is likely to be meditation-induced.



Entry: Stuck
Date: Sat Jul 17 09:34:15 EDT 2021

I feel pretty much stuck.  I know this is temporary, but it feels very
permanent.  It's easy to just give up.

So I mentioned to my brother I will just continue and see where this
goes, if intentional formal practice actually does something good.


Entry: Really stuck
Date: Sat Jul 17 13:57:35 EDT 2021

The intensity of the current episode is strong.  The main emotional
impressions are:

- Strong anger and frustration, that has no vent channel so is leading
  to build-up.  I want to punch something.

- Strong disagreement with nearly everything.  Strong NO.

- Strong embedding in all this.  The ability to catch it and see it is
  diminishing.

Meditation works, as long as I do shamata style to first calm down the
strong emotions.  Stopping practice just brings back the emotions.


https://www.mctb.org/mctb2/table-of-contents/part-iv-insight/30-the-progress-of-insight/9-desire-for-deliverance/

    Heres the One Weird Trick to this stage for those who are not
    going through it at the level of vibrations or kasina-induced
    visuals, but instead going through it at the level of emotions:
    honestly feel that crash, that utter devastation, that agony, that
    bottoming out, that despair, that longing for release, in all its
    down-to-earth, real, gritty humanity, allowing that plunge to
    happen inside you deep down, down, down. Then, investigate that,
    just as it is, because it is a crucial part of the trip, part of
    the journey, part of the remarkable opportunity to bring the clear
    light of wisdom to every aspect of our full emotional range,
    including the bottom of it. So, fall. Notice it. Allow it to
    be. Notice it is made of sensations: feel them honestly, as well
    as all the reactions to those sensations. This is the key.


Entry: I'm over analyzing
Date: Sun Jul 18 23:05:30 EDT 2021

Pretty clear I'm stuck when it comes to finding more ways to turn this
around conceptually.  There is work to be done first.


Entry: Just find the contraction
Date: Mon Jul 19 08:44:26 EDT 2021

It's actually quite straightforward. When there is suffering, there is
contraction/identification. The only task is to clearly see it.

What I keep running into is a mechanism that seems to prevent me from
investigating, so investigate that.

The answer is always right here, but once lost in meta-story about
meditation, it can be hard to find a way out.  That kind is extremely
sticky...



Entry: Aversion, practically
Date: Mon Jul 19 09:25:45 EDT 2021

So I've still not found a practical way to combine clearly seeing
contraction in the high intensity rangres, and doing that while
engaging in mental activity, which is a bit of a double whammy.

Getting amped up for solving problems seems to require personal
investment, attachment.  Is it actually possible to do that without
that kind of investment?  Or is it possible to see that investment
while using it as a tool, to keep it on leash so to speak?




Entry: it's a feature
Date: Mon Jul 19 10:46:42 EDT 2021

I find all wandering thoughts to be about other people, mostly.  About
what they are doing me wrong, or about what I need to do to scheme a
certain situation, or how to comply to specific social norms.

That it is hard to intercept this seems to be a feature.  Taking these
thoughts serious is a survival strategy.

Simplified, if I remove myself from social situations, the thoughts
mostly revolve around lack of purpose.  One way to look at purpose
then is that it is social integration.  Being a cog in the machine is
important.




Entry: subtle dullness
Date: Mon Jul 19 18:33:22 EDT 2021

Picking up TMI again.  I ordered a copy mostly to get more concrete
advice on the hindrances.  I've run into subtle dullness a lot lately:
easy to get into this pleasant state.  Very relaxing but it was fairly
obvious it wasn't going anywhere and after reading the stage 5 chapter
it does seem to be exactly that: pleasant state with not much
mindfulness.

The cure, in a nutshell, is to regain mindfulness through strong
intention to do so.  I've seen this work, shifting the dull dreamy
state to one of clarity.

However in stage 4, it is adviced to use stable subtle dullness as a
way to overcome strong dullness, so maybe not skip ahead?



Entry: blissed out
Date: Tue Jul 20 12:31:21 EDT 2021

Something gradually changed late last night.

Meditation became easier, and it seems I opened up to bring out some
demons.  Things from my past surfaced and I had a good cry.




Entry: Brewer anxiety
Date: Wed Jul 21 19:30:04 EDT 2021

https://findingmastery.net/judson-brewer-2/
anxiety is suffering
anxiety is also the substrate to high performance



Entry: Real life
Date: Fri Jul 23 11:28:59 EDT 2021

Yesterday little sleep and mostly occupied with partner's medical
situation, but I did notice a calm about it that was different.

Also noticed some detachment, which is not a good indicator.  I'm
taking that as a need for more explicit focus on compassion which I
already concluded earlier.

There was clearly some part that of me attempting to distance itself
from the situation and the associated risk.  My mind went to strange,
self-serving places.  I did feel absence of guilt about those thoughts
so I guess that is a sign of progress.  They were labled as just
thoughts.  Something the mind does.



Entry: Energy
Date: Sat Jul 24 18:54:27 EDT 2021

One of the main things I wonder at this point, is if my lack of energy
can be manipulated, even if indirectly.  It's becoming a problem.

Mostly this seems to be a problem of disengagement through
disappointment, mostly related to work and the difficulty of dealing
with uncertainty.

At this point, with some meditation inertia, I do not experience
depressed mood (i.e. no hopelessness) but I do feel very tired.  I am
sleeping ok.  I'n not eating great, so that could be part of it, and
I'm very bored with my work so that's another thing.

Assuming this is purely a mental problem: I give up because currently
demands are too high, unpredictability is too high.  How can I
overcome that?  I don't need to be a super performer.  Just need to be
able to get going again.

Yeah just blabbing here makes me see mind is not working properly...

I continue vipassana, noting tiredness, aversion, confusion.


Entry: Sad, Disappointed
Date: Mon Jul 26 07:45:31 EDT 2021

Waking up, not where I want to be.  Aversion to getting back to work,
face a boring but difficult problem, with little reward maybe?  Not
sure.  Confusion also.

Two things in sit yesterday: tried jhana, got very absorbed seeing
"animations" in my head.  Later on also faint images of memories as
entities but nothing that looked too real.  Probably suggestion.

But not sure if this was really jhana.  The word "absorption" does fit
the bill but I do not really feel the body or surroundings
disappearing or anything.  It does feel that it is possible to go
further, but for some reason concentration doesn't get high enough.

EDIT: 3 hours later I am totally spaced out after blogging on the alt.


Entry: scripting
Date: Mon Jul 26 08:00:39 EDT 2021

I'm reading about meditation again, and I pretty much experience what
I read after reading it, so this gives me the indication that it is
all constructed, or at least that there is a lot of noise that just
needs a little bit of information in order to be interpreted in a
particular way.  Reading about it ligitimizes it and seems to bring
about the experience.


Entry: Aversion
Date: Mon Jul 26 08:01:46 EDT 2021

Aversion is currently the most obvious sentiment in daily life, and a
hindrance in meditation that is not so easy to observe as is.  It
tends to create a chain reaction of contraction.

Suppose I would be first path, then this would be indeed the next
challenge, but the whole idea of the predictable progess of insight is
too confusing to me at this time, so let's stick to the experience.

There are a couple of life situations that create very clear
aversive/avoiding/judging responses:

- Thinking about a boring problem for work

- Avoiding people to avoid chitchat and getting caught up in their
  "stream".

- Avoiding house maintenance chores

Most of it can be boiled down to avoiding contact with people.

I might need another way to manage this.  I.e. to seek more direct
contact, to engage more.



Entry: micromeditation on aversion
Date: Tue Jul 27 11:04:14 EDT 2021

Trying to find a way through this.  In daily life, when mindfulness is
low and absorption into concept is high, aversion can easily arise and
cause a stir.

The most typical occurance is to read and suddenly feel a push to what
is conveyed.  Often then leading into mind wandering.

There are other occasions of mind wandering when reading but the
aversion is the strongest one, easiest to recognize due to magnitude.

The thing to do at that point is to do a micro meditation, focusing on
the fallout of the aversion arising.  It really doesn't need much.  15
to 30 seconds is typically enough to dissipate, and restore awareness
of the body.



Entry: i'm alert again
Date: Tue Jul 27 12:06:26 EDT 2021

Maybe yesterday's letting go of trying to force the this/that
distinction to collapse released some tension, freeing up space to
think?



Entry: Models are necessary
Date: Fri Jul 30 08:26:25 EDT 2021

Models cause me a lot of scripting issues mostly in the form of
creating expectations, but they are also very helpful to get out of
the prison of a particular thought loop.

The problem I've been experiencing these last couple of days: waking
up, immediately being bombarded by emotional upheaval.  The content is
typical social phobia material: fear about upcoming interactions, and
judgement about not living up to expectations.

I am able to break out of those easily when in a mindful state, but
being dropped into a non-mindful state, e.g. after waking up, makes it
difficult to get my bearings.

The difficulty in those situations is to remember to take a break, do
a formal meditation.  Especially when it's not practically possible,
it can get very difficult to break out of the loop.  This is where
inertia really helps.

Today what caused the transition is first relieving sexual tension
that had built up.  That took it down a notch, but still felt quite
embedded in mental discomfort, not able to take distance.

After that I layed down in a quiet place and went over the usual set
of techniques to see what would cause a transition.

The intention was to do shamata but what caused me to break out was a
recollection of Shinzen's idea of Flow (impermanence).  Just looking
for the stream of arising and vanishing immediately calmed me down.

Shinzen's see-hear-feel (try to split up any mental activity in
imagery, self-talk and body sensations) is also very helpful as a
thing to try to break out.

The other kind of vipassana instruction "just watch what arises" works
only when I already have a base level of mindfulness going.

Sometimes a simplified model really boils it down enough to make it
very clear what exactly needs to be done.  I find I need a lot of
those: for every attractor that causes stuckness, some idea is needed
that causes the loop to break.

Once broken, there is enough mindfulness to just continue practice as
usual.

Summary: self-loops can be very strong, hard to get out of.  They seem
to have a self-defence mechanism that prevents their dissolution.
However it is possible to have two competing self loops: e.g. one
anxiety loop, and one loop of desire to get out.

Once the latter one causes a clear memory of a technique to arise and
give it more relevance than the anxiety loop, a flip occurs almost
immediately.  In that process it is so crystal clear that this is made
of nothing substantial at all.

How can these self loop be so strong, and at the same time disappear
in an instance?



Entry: do concentration practice instead of naps
Date: Mon Aug  2 16:15:38 EDT 2021

So today this worked: got really stuck with programming work, no
longer able to manipulate the objects in my head.

Tried to listen to a podcast to relax, but that was again a bunch of
concepts which really didn't work, so I put down the headphones and
started concentration practice instead.

This worked and "cleared the gunk", as the solution to the problem I
got stuck on just popped into my head.

So an important distinction seems to be that concentration practice
shouldn't be confused with "manipulating mental objects in a
concentrated way".  It isn't conceptual in the sense that it is not
conceptually-manipulative.  It is just about resting on an object
witout the relational component.  It's about the background, not the
object itself (of course).





Entry: let's work with aversion
Date: Wed Aug  4 17:17:59 EDT 2021

Ok let's do this.

I have a task I need to do. I'm tired, and I really don't want to do
it. It is a cognitive task, so I will need my whole focus to be on the
task.

Is it possible to do this and not let feelings of aversion solidify in
the background?  Can I actually move myy attention on the task and the
aversion?

EDIT: So I started doing this.  The surrender that was already gone
through to start the experiment had some inertia, so I just started
solving the problem Lost myself in it completely, then suddenly became
aware I was doing this other experiment.

So conclusion from this specific try: I can't maintain mindfulness of
"being in meditation" when doing this work.  The aversion exercise
should probably focus mostly on getting started, then maybe install an
interrupt handler that if aversion aries, the awarenes of being in an
experiment comes back?



Entry: Some remarks about re-reading this.
Date: Sat Aug  7 16:19:17 EDT 2021

- I am very aware of the self-absorbed nature of grooming my dharma
  log.  Though it feels important to go through it and publish it.

- Effect of noting practice is immediate, even after a couple of days
  it starts to do something, shifting your awareness.  I've noticed
  that when picking it up again as well.

- I am taking a more nuanced approach on attanments and maps.  The
  models are useful, but also get in the way.  I am very sensitive to
  suggestion - fake it till you make it.  I'm a "mixer".  I hear an
  idea and suddenly it is part of me as if it always was.  Not much I
  can do about it apart from not taking it all to serious.

- When I mention mania it is probably hypomania: inflated self,
  overconfidence, theatrical.  A start contrast to my usual calm or
  neurotic state.

- When I mention panick attack, it means a fear feedback loop related
  to social anxiety.  I don't fear that I am going to die, just that
  something really bad is going to happen, usually some kind of
  "relation death".

- I was experiencing derealization at some point.  Not currently
  experiencing it.  Enlightenment's evil twin as Shinzen calls it.

- My daily pattern hasn't changed much in a decade :)

- Dan was right: you need to do Metta and Vipassana

The rest is in the tweets.




Entry: Second path as clinging to self
Date: Sun Aug  8 03:49:58 EDT 2021

After reading all this, probably on the way to 2nd path.

Not so much clinging in general, but maybe focus on the grasping of
self?  Is that a useful prompt?



Entry: Reading the dharma log
Date: Sun Aug  8 11:58:14 EDT 2021

And sleeping on it.
Some conclusions:

- don't ever stop meditating again. it seems to prevent the depressive
  cycles simply by cutting the spiral that seems to be happening for
  some reason.  probably isolation.. that in intself makes it
  essential.

- don't stay isolated like this. wanting to be isolated is a sign of
  depression.

- find a job that isn't so stressful



